Faster RCNN Object Detection – Engineering AI Agents
Engineering AI Agents
BOOK
Foundations
Training Deep Networks
Perception
Kinematics
State Estimation
Large Language Models
Multimodal Reasoning
Task Planning
Global Planning
Local Planning
Markov Decision Processes
Reinforcement Learning
VLA Agents
COURSES
Introduction to AI
AI for Robotics
Deep Learning for Computer Vision
DATA MINING - BEING PORTED
MEDIA
AI for Robotics
ABOUT ME
Faster RCNN Object Detection
Introduction to Convolutional Neural Networks
CNN Layers
CNN Example Architectures
Using ConvNets with Small Datasets
Visualizing what convnets learn
Feature Extraction via Residual Networks
Introduction to Scene Understanding
Object Detection
Object Detection and Semantic Segmentation Metrics
Region-CNN (RCNN) Object Detection
Fast RCNN Object Detection
Faster RCNN Object Detection
You Only Look Once (YOLO)
Mask R-CNN Semantic Segmentation
Mask R-CNN Demo
Mask R-CNN - Inspect Training Data
Mask R-CNN - Inspect Trained Model
Mask R-CNN - Inspect Weights of a Trained Model
MaskRCNN Inference
Detectron2 Beginner’s Tutorial
On this page
Region Proposal Network (RPN)
Edit this page
View source
Report an issue
Faster RCNN Object Detection
With
Faster RCNN
, the 3rd generation in the family of region-based detectors, we are replacing the selective search algorithm that is considered computationally expensive, with a neural network called the Region Proposal Network (RPN) that as the name implies produces the proposals. This allows us to call the detector differentiable and therefore train it end-to-end in a much more straightforward way.
Figure 1: Faster RCNN Architecture - the RPN tells the Fast RCNN detector where to attend to.
Therefore, in this architecture there is one CNN network that not only produces a
global
feature map but also produces proposals from the feature map itself rather than the original image, using additional convolutional layers and a sliding window scheme detailed below. Since the RPN component is the key differentiator we limit the discussion to it.
Region Proposal Network (RPN)
Figure 2: Region Proposals as generated by the RPN network
The RPN produces proposals by sliding a window
\(n \times n\)
over the feature map. At each sliding-window location, we simultaneously predict multiple region proposals, where the number of maximum possible proposals for each location is denoted as
\(k\)
. So the regression layer has
\(4k\)
outputs encoding the coordinates of
\(k\)
boxes, and the classification layer outputs
\(2k\)
scores that represent the probability of the presence of an object or not an object for each proposal.
The
\(k\)
proposals are parameterized relative to
\(k\)
reference boxes, which we call
anchor boxes
. The size can be changed but by default we use 3 scales and 3 aspect ratios, yielding k = 9 anchors at each sliding position. For a feature map of a size
\(W × H\)
(typically ∼2,400), there are
\(W \times H \times k\)
anchors in total.
The RPN network produces a classification score i.e. how confident we are that there is an object for each of the anchor boxes as well as the regression on the anchor box coordinates.
See lecture notes for further RPN discussion
Fast RCNN Object Detection
You Only Look Once (YOLO)
Edit this page
View source
Report an issue