On the difficulty of training recurrent neural networks
Razvan Pascanu PASCANUR@IRO.UMONTREAL.CA
Université de Montréal, 2920, chemin de la ‘Tour, Montréal, Québec, Canada, H38T 1J8
Tomas Mikolov T. MIKOLOV@GMAIL.COM
SpeechQ@FIT, Brno University of Technology, Brno, Czech Republic
Yoshua Bengio YOSHUA.BENGIOQUMONTREAL.CA
Université de Montréal, 2920, chemin de la ‘Tour, Montréal, Québec, Canada, H38T 1J8
Abstract CD
uy ie ei
There are two widely known issues with prop-
erly training recurrent neural networks, the
vanishing and the exploding gradient prob- Figure 1. Schematic of a recurrent neural network. The
lems detailed in Bengio et al. (1994). In recurrent connections in the hidden layer allow information
this paper we attempt to improve the under- to persist from one input to another.
standing of the underlying issues by explor-
ing these problems from an analytical, a geo- 1.1. Training recurrent networks
metric and a dynamical systems perspective.
A generic recurrent neural network, with input u,; and
Our analysis is used to justify a simple yet ef-
state x, for time step t, is given by:
fective solution. We propose a gradient norm
clipping strategy to deal with exploding gra-
Xt = F(xt_1, uz, 6) (1)
dients and a soft constraint for the vanishing
gradients problem. We validate empirically
In the theoretical section of this paper we will some-
our hypothesis and proposed solutions in the times make use of the specific parametrization: !
experimental section.
Xt = W reed (Xt_-1) + W in Ut + b (2)
In this case, the parameters of the model are given
1. Introduction
by the recurrent weight matrix W,.,, the bias b and
A recurrent neural network (RNN), e.g. Fig. 1, is a input weight matrix W;,,, collected in 6 for the gen-
neural network model proposed in the 80’s (Rumelhart eral case. Xg is provided by the user, set to zero or
et al., 1986; Elman, 1990; Werbos, 1988) for modeling learned, and o is an element-wise function. A cost
time series. The structure of the network is similar to E =o epep E+ measures the performance of the net-
that of a standard multilayer perceptron, with the dis- work on some given task, where €; = £(x;).
tinction that we allow connections among hidden units
One approach for computing the necessary gradients is
associated with a time delay. ‘Through these connec-
backpropagation through time (BPTT), where the re-
tions the model can retain information about the past,
current model is represented as a multi-layer one (with
enabling it to discover temporal correlations between
an unbounded number of layers) and backpropagation
events that are far away from each other in the data.
is applied on the unrolled model (see Fig. 2).
While in principle the recurrent network is a simple
We will diverge from the classical BPTT equations at
and powerful model, in practice, it is hard to train
this point and re-write the gradients in order to better
properly. Among the main reasons why this model is
so unwieldy are the vanishing gradient and exploding ‘For any model respecting eq. (2) we can construct
gradient problems described in Bengio et al. (1994). another model following the more widely known equation
Xt = O(WrecXt-1 + Winue + b) that behaves the same
Proceedings of the 30°" International Conference on Ma-
(for e.g. by redefining € := &(o(xz))) and vice versa.
chine Learning, Atlanta, Georgia, USA, 2013. JMLR:
Therefore the two formulations are equivalent. We chose
W&CP volume 28. Copyright 2013 by the author(s).
eq. (2) for convenience.
On the difficulty of training recurrent neural networks
Ett E Erat
[! OOxE, | | aOEXt; | OE4x1 grow exponentially more than short term ones. The
vanishing gradients problem refers to the opposite be-
a a
haviour, when long term components go exponentially
Oxt_2 OXt-1 | Ox: | OOXXtt4419 fast to norm 0, making it impossible for the model to
learn correlation between temporally distant events.
Ut Ut+1
2.1. The mechanics
Figure 2. Unrolling recurrent neural networks in time by
creating a copy of the model for each time step. We denote To understand this phenomenon we need to look at the
by x; the hidden state of the network at time ¢, by uz the form of each temporal component, and in particular at
input of the network at time ¢ and by & the error obtained the matrix factors pa (see eq. (5)) that take the form
from the output at time ¢. of a product of t — k Jacobian matrices. In the same
way a product of t—k real numbers can shrink to zero
highlight the exploding gradients problem: or explode to infinity, so does this product of matrices
(along some direction v).
OE OE;
ap = >a (3)
00 £4, 00 In what follows we will try to formalize these intuitions
(extending similar derivations done in Bengio et al.
0OE0; _ (OEe; OOexX, or0 0X k) (4) (1994) where a single hidden unit case was considered).
If we consider a linear version of the model (i.e. set o to
1<k<t
the identity function in eq. (2)) we can use the power
a OX, n = II x Ox y ; =7 [| Widiag(o’(x:-1)) (5) iteration method to formally analyze this product of
Jacobian matrices and obtain tight conditions for when
t>i>k t>i>k
the gradients explode or vanish (see the supplementary
These equations were obtained by writing the gradi- materials). It is sufficient for p < 1, where p is the
: Otx,
ents in a sum-of-products form. “;%* refers to the spectral radius of the recurrent weight matrix W,-<¢c,
“immediate” partial derivative ? of the state x, with for long term components to vanish (as t + oo) and
respect to 6, where x;,_; is taken as a constant with necessary for p > 1 for them to explode.
respect to 6. Specifically, considering eq. 2, the value
We generalize this result for nonlinear functions o
of any row 7 of the matrix (oo ) is just o(xXp_1).
where |o’(x)| is bounded, ||diag(o’(xz))|| < 7 € R,
Eq. (5) also provides the form of Jacobian matrix
by relying on singular values.
ao for the specific parametrization given in eq. (2),
where diag converts a vector into a diagonal matrix, We first prove that it is sufficient for Ay < a where
and o’ computes element-wise the derivative of o. A is the largest singular value of W,.<, for the vanish-
ing gradient problem to occur. Note that we assume
Any gradi: ent component 3OE0: «:1S also a sum (see eq.
the parametrization given by eq. (2). The Jacobian
(4)), whose terms we refer to as temporal contribu- matrix ome is given by WZ..diag(o’(x,)). The 2-
tions or temporal components. One can see that each
norm of this Jacobian is bounded by the product of
such temporal contribution gee ee —a=;* measures how
the norms of the two matrices (see eq. (6)). Due to
9 at step k affects the cost at step t > k. The fac-
our assumption, this implies that it is smaller than 1.
tors gue (eq. (5)) transport the error “in time“ from
step t back to step k. We would further loosely distin- Vk, ||= “ =] 1 < || WZ. I|diag(o’ (xx))I| < 5 1 7<i
guish between long term and short term contributions,
where long term refers to components for which k < t (6)
and short term to everything else. Om <i <1. The
existence of 7 is given by eq. (6). "By induction over 3,
2. Exploding and vanishing gradients
we can show that
Introduced in Bengio et al. (1994), the exploding gra-
x (Joe
dients problem refers to the large increase in the norm OX IIes (7)
OX
of the gradient during training. Such events are due to
the explosion of the long term components, which can
As 7 < 1, it follows that, according to eq. (7), long
*We use “immediate” partial derivatives in order to term contributions (for which t — k is large) go to 0
avoid confusion, though one can use the concept of total exponentially fast with t — k. C]
derivative and the proper meaning of partial derivative to
express the same property By inverting this proof we get the necessary condition
On the difficulty of training recurrent neural networks
for exploding gradients, namely that the largest singu- ing attractor or from a disappearing one qualifies as
lar value A, is larger than ; (otherwise the long term crossing a boundary between attractors, this term en-
components would vanish instead of exploding). For capsulates also the observations from Doya (1993).
tanh we have y = 1 while for sigmoid we have y = Y/4.
We will re-use the one-hidden unit model (and plot)
from Doya (1993) (see Fig. 3) to depict our exten-
2.2. Drawing similarities with dynamical
sion, though , as the original hypothesis, our extension
systems
does not depend on the dimensionality of the model.
We can improve our understanding of the exploding
The x-axis covers the parameter b and the y-axis the
gradients and vanishing gradients problems by employ-
asymptotic state x... The bold line follows the move-
ing a dynamical systems perspective, as it was done
ment of the final point attractor, xo, as b changes.
before in Doya (1993); Bengio et al. (1993).
At 6; we have a bifurcation boundary where a new at-
We recommend reading Strogatz (1994) for a formal tractor emerges (when b decreases from oo), while at
and detailed treatment of dynamical systems theory. bg we have another that results in the disappearance
For any parameter assignment 0, depending on the ini- of one of the two attractors. In the interval (01, b2)
tial state xg, the state x; of an autonomous dynamical we are in a rich regime, where there are two attractors
system converges, under the repeated application of and the change in position of boundary between them,
the map F’, to one of several possible different attrac- as we change 0, is traced out by a dashed line. The
tor states. The model could also find itself in a chaotic gray dashed arrows describe the evolution of the state
regime, a case in which some of the following observa- x if the network is initialized in that region. Cross-
tions may not hold, but that is not treated in depth ing the boundary between basins of attractions is de-
here. Attractors describe the asymptotic behaviour of picted with unfilled circles, where a small change in
the model. ‘The state space is divided into basins of at- the state at time 0 results in a sudden large change in
traction, one for each attractor. If the model is started x;. Crossing a bifurcation ((Doya, 1993) original hy-
in one basin of attraction, the model will converge to pothesis) is shown with filled circles. Note how in the
the corresponding attractor as ¢ grows. figure, there are only two values of b with a bifurca-
tion, but a whole range of values for which there can
Dynamical systems theory says that as 6 changes, the
be a boundary crossing.
asymptotic behaviour changes smoothly almost every-
1 4
where except for certain crucial points where drastic X
changes occur (the new asymptotic behaviour ceases
0.8f -
to be topologically equivalent to the old one). These es °
points form bifurcation boundaries and are caused by
0 . 6 4 Av, If *.
attractors that appear, disappear or change shape. e 1 x e xe | yAr,
Doya (1993) hypothesizes that such bifurcation cross-
ings could cause the gradients to explode. We would
like to extend this observation into a sufficient condi-
tion for gradients to explode, by addressing the issue
of crossing boundaries between basins of attraction. “3 be -2-5 bi “2 b
We argue that bifurcations are global events that can Figure 3. Bifurcation diagram of a single hidden unit RNN
(with fixed recurrent weight of 5.0 and adjustable bias };
have locally no effect and therefore crossing them is
example introduced in Doya (1993)). See text.
neither sufficient nor necessary for the gradients to ex-
plode. For example due to a bifurcation one attractor Another limitation of previous analysis is that it con-
can disappear, but if the model’s state is not found in siders autonomous systems and assumes the observa-
the basin of attraction of said attractor, learning will tions hold for input-driven models as well. In (Ben-
not be affected by it. However when either a change in gio et al., 1994) input is dealt with by assuming it
the state or in the position of the boundary between is bounded noise. The downside of this approach is
basins of attraction (which can be caused by a change that it limits how one can reason about the input. In
in 6) is such that the model falls in a different basin practice, the input is supposed to drive the dynamical
than before, the state will be attracted in a different system, being able to leave the model in some attrac-
direction resulting in the explosion of the gradients. tor state, or kick it out of the basin of attraction when
This crossing of boundaries between basins of attrac- certain triggering patterns present themselves.
tion is a local event and it is sufficient for the gradients
We propose to extend our analysis to input driven
to explode. By assuming that crossing into an emerg-
models by folding the input into the map. We con-
On the difficulty of training recurrent neural networks
sider the family of maps F’, where we apply a different avoiding the vanishing gradient means staying close to
F, at each step. Intuitively, for the gradients to ex- the boundaries between basins of attractions.
plode we require the same behaviour as before, where
2.3. The geometrical interpretation
(at least in some direction) the maps F),..,F; agree
and change direction. Fig. 4 describes this behaviour. Let us consider a simple one hidden unit model (eq.
(8)) where we provide an initial state zo and train the
model to have a specific target value after 50 steps.
Note that for simplicity we assume no input.
re = wo(ez~-1) +b (8)
Fig. 6 shows the error surface €59 = (o(a59) — 0.7)?,
Axt
where #9 = .5 and o to be the sigmoid function.
Figure 4. This diagram illustrates how the change in xz,
Ax;, can be large for a small Axo. The blue vs red
(left vs right) trajectories are generated by the same maps
F\, F2,... for two different initial states.
For the specific parametrization in eq. (2) we can take
the analogy one step further by decomposing the maps
F, into a fixed map F and a time-varying one U;.
F(x) = Wreco(x) + b corresponds to an input-less
recurrent network, while U;(x) = x-+ W;,,u; describes 2 -2.0
* 5.4 -2.8 _~2 -6 a=i2e. 4o,f~b2.2 ~*
the effect of the input. This is depicted in in Fig. 5.
Since U; changes with time, it can not be analyzed us-
ing standard dynamical systems tools, but F can. This Figure 6. We plot the error surface of a single hidden unit
means that when a boundary between basins of attrac- recurrent network, highlighting the existence of high cur-
tions is crossed for F, the state will move towards a vature walls. The solid lines depicts standard trajectories
that gradient descent might follow. Using dashed arrow
different attractor, which for large t could lead (un-
the diagram shows what would happen if the gradients is
less the input maps U; are opposing this) to a large
rescaled to a fixed size when its norm is above a threshold.
discrepancy in x;. Therefore studying the asymptotic
behaviour of F' can provide useful information about
We can easily analyze the behavior of the model in the
where such events are likely to happen.
linear case, with b = 0, i.e. x; = xqw*. We have that
ore = tagw*! and o2e = t(t — 1)xow*~?, implying
Xt A Lt Xt
that when the first derivative explodes, so does the
second derivative.
In the general case, when the gradients explode they
do so along some directions v. There exists, in such
situations, a v such that ety > Cat, where Cia €
R and a > 1 (for e.g., in the linear case, v is the
eigenvector corresponding to the largest eigenvalue of
Figure 5. Illustrates how one can break apart the maps
W,-c). If this bound is tight, we hypothesize that
F,,..F; into a constant map F and the maps U;,.., U:. The
when gradients explode so does the curvature along v,
dotted vertical line represents the boundary between basins
of attraction, and the straight dashed arrow the direction leading to a wall in the error surface, like the one seen
of the map F on each side of the boundary. This diagram in Fig. 6. Based on this hypothesis we devise a simple
is an extension of Fig. 4. solution to the exploding gradient problem (see Fig 6).
If both the gradient and the leading eigenvector of the
One interesting observation from the dynamical sys- curvature are aligned with the exploding direction v, it
tems perspective with respect to vanishing gradients follows that the error surface has a steep wall perpen-
is the following. If the factors aot go to zero (for t—k dicular to v (and consequently to the gradient). This
large), it means that x; does not depend on x, (if means that when stochastic gradient descent (SGD)
we change x, by some A, x; stays the same). This reaches the wall and does a gradient descent step, it
translates into the model at x; being close to conver- will be forced to jump across the valley moving perpen-
gence towards some attractor (which it would reach dicular to the steep walls, possibly leaving the valley
from anywhere in the neighbourhood of x;). ‘Therefore and disrupting the learning process.
On the difficulty of training recurrent neural networks
The dashed arrows in Fig. 6 correspond to ignoring known, it might not be trivial to initialize the model
the norm of this large step, ensuring that the model accordingly. Also, such initialization does not prevent
stays close to the wall. One key insight is that all crossing the boundary between basins of attraction.
the steps taken when the gradient explodes are aligned
Teacher forcing refers to using targets for some or all
with v and ignore other descent direction. At the wall,
hidden units. When computing the state at time f,
a bounded norm step in the direction of the gradient
we use the targets at t — 1 as the value of all the hid-
therefore merely pushes us back inside the smoother
den units in x;_; which have a target defined. It has
low-curvature region besides the wall, whereas a regu-
been shown that in practice it can reduce the chance
lar gradient step would bring us very far, thus slowing
that gradients explode, and even allow training gen-
or preventing further training.
erator models or models that work with unbounded
The important assumption in this scenario, compared amounts of memory(Pascanu and Jaeger, 2011; Doya
to the classical high curvature valley, is that we assume and Yoshizawa, 1991). One important downside is that
that the valley is wide, as we have a large region around it requires a target to be defined at every time step.
the wall where if we land we can rely on first order
Hochreiter and Schmidhuber (1997); Graves et al.
methods to move towards a local minima. The effec-
(2009) propose the LSTM model to deal with the van-
tiveness of clipping provides indirect evidence, as oth-
ishing gradients problem. It relies on special type of
erwise, even with clipping, SGD would not be able to
linear unit with a self connection of value 1. The flow
explore descent directions of low curvature and there-
of information into and out of the unit is guarded by
fore further minimize the error.
learned input and output gates. There are several vari-
Our hypothesis, when it holds, could also provide an- ations of this basic structure. This solution does not
other argument in favor of the Hessian-Free approach address explicitly the exploding gradients problem.
compared to other second order methods (among other
Sutskever et al. (2011) use the Hessian-Free optimizer
existing arguments). Hessian-Free, and truncated
in conjunction with structural damping. This approach
Newton methods in general, compute a new estimate
seems able to address the vanishing gradient problem,
of the Hessian matrix before each update step and can
though more detailed analysis is missing. Presumably
take into account abrupt changes in curvature (such as
this method works because in high dimensional spaces
the ones suggested by our hypothesis) while other ap-
there is a high probability for long term components to
proaches use a smoothness assumption, averaging 2nd
be orthogonal to short term ones. ‘This would allow the
order signals over many steps.
Hessian to rescale these components independently.
3. Dealing with the exploding and In practice, one can not guarantee that this property
vanishing gradient holds. ‘The method addresses the exploding gradient
as well, as it takes curvature into account. Structural
3.1. Previous solutions
damping is an enhancement that forces the Jacobian
Using an L1 or L2 penalty on the recurrent weights can matrices Ox to have small norm, hence further helping
help with exploding gradients. Assuming weights are with the exploding gradients problem. The need for
initialized to small values, the largest singular value A this extra term when solving the pathological prob-
of Wee is probably smaller than 1. The L1/L2 term lems might suggest that second order derivatives do
can ensure that during training A; stays smaller than not always grow at same rate as first order ones.
1, and in this regime gradients can not explode (see
Echo State Networks (Jaeger and Haas, 2004) avoid
sec. 2.1). This approach limits the model to single
the exploding and vanishing gradients problem by not
point attractor at the origin, where any information
learning W,.-. and W;,,,. ‘They are sampled from hand
inserted in the model dies out exponentially fast. This
crafted distributions. Because the spectral radius of
prevents the model to learn generator networks, nor
Wee is, by construction, smaller than 1, information
can it exhibit long term memory traces.
fed in to the model dies out exponentially fast. An
Doya (1993) proposes to pre-program the model (to extension to the model is given by leaky integration
initialize the model in the right regime) or to use units (Jaeger et al., 2007), where
teacher forcing. The first proposal assumes that if the
Xk = AXp-1 + (1 —_ a)o(WrecXk-1 + W in Uk + b).
model exhibits from the beginning the same kind of
asymptotic behaviour as the one required by the tar- These units can be used to solve the standard bench-
get, then there is no need to cross a bifurcation bound- mark proposed by Hochreiter and Schmidhuber (1997)
ary. The downside is that one can not always know for learning long term dependencies (Jaeger, 2012).
the required asymptotic behaviour, and, even if it is
On the difficulty of training recurrent neural networks
We would make a final note about the approach pro- order method would do), and a more natural choice
posed by Tomas Mikolov in his PhD thesis (Mikolov, might be a regularization term.
2012)(and implicitly used in the state of the art re-
The regularizer we propose prefers solutions for which
sults on language modelling (Mikolov et al., 2011)). It
the error preserves norm as it travels back in time:
involves clipping the gradient’s temporal components
| BE OXn41 2
element-wise (clipping an entry when it exceeds in ab- 0-0 =>. -1) 6
OXk41 OX},
solute value a fixed threshold). k = (9)
k k OXk+1
3.2. Scaling down the gradients
In order to be computationally efficient, we only use
As suggested in section 2.3, one mechanism to deal
the “immediate” partial derivative of 2 with respect to
with the exploding gradient problem is to rescale their Wee (we consider that x; and Deen as being constant
norm whenever it goes over a threshold:
with respect to W,.. when computing the derivative
Algorithm 1 Pseudo-code for norm clipping of Q;), as depicted in eq. (10). This can be done effi-
go 35 ciently because we get the values of ge from BPTT.
if ||g|| > threshold then We use Theano to compute these gradients (Bergstra
& e threshold ¢
lel & et al., 2010; Bastien et al., 2012).
end if ata _ atO,
OW rec ~~ k OWrec 9 2
This algorithm is similar to the one proposed by ‘Tomas ( EWE, etiag(a! (xx))] ;
Mikolov and we only diverged from the original pro- |e "
posal in an attempt to provide a better theoretical jus- Lk OW rec
tification (see section 2.3; we also move in a descent (10)
direction for the current mini-batch). We regard this Note that our regularization term only forces the Ja-
work as an investigation of why clipping works. In cobian matrices aa to preserve norm in the relevant
practice both variants behave similarly. direction of the error xe, not for any direction (we
Xk+1
do not enforce that all eigenvalues are close to 1). The
The proposed clipping is simple and computationally
efficient, but it does however introduce an additional second observation is that we are using a soft con-
hyper-parameter, namely the threshold. One good straint, therefore we are not ensured the norm of the
heuristic for setting this threshold is to look at statis- error signal is preserved. This means that we still need
tics on the average norm over a sufficiently large num- to deal with the exploding gradient problem, as a sin-
ber of updates. In our experience values from half gle step induced by it can disrupt learning. From the
to ten times this average can still yield convergence, dynamical systems perspective we can see that pre-
though convergence speed can be affected. venting the vanishing gradient problem implies that
we are pushing the model towards the boundary of
3.3. Vanishing gradient regularization the current basin of attraction (such that during the
We opt to address the vanishing gradients problem us- N steps it does not have time to converge), making it
ing a regularization term that represents a preference more probable for the gradients to explode.
for parameter values such that back-propagated gra-
4, Experiments and results
dients neither increase or decrease in magnitude. Our
intuition is that increasing the norm of aa means the
4.1. Pathological synthetic problems
error at time ¢ is more sensitive to all inputs u;,.., uz
As done in Martens and Sutskever (2011), we address
(3% is a factor in ot ). In practice some of these in-
some of the pathological problems from Hochreiter and
puts will be irrelevant for the prediction at time ¢t and
Schmidhuber (1997) that require learning long term
will behave like noise that the network needs to learn
correlations. We refer the reader to this original pa-
to ignore. The network can not learn to ignore these
per for a detailed description of the tasks and to the
irrelevant inputs unless there is an error signal. ‘These
supplementary materials for the complete description
two issues can not be solved in parallel, and it seems
of setup for any of the following experiments. °
natural to expect that we might need to force the net-
work to increase || aot || at the expense of larger errors
4.1.1. THE TEMPORAL ORDER PROBLEM
(caused by the irrelevant input entries) and then wait
We consider the temporal order problem as the pro-
for it to learn to ignore these input entries. This sug-
totypical pathological problem, extending our results
gests that moving towards increasing the norm of a
to the other proposed tasks afterwards. The input is
can not be always done while following a descent di-
rection of the error € (which is, for e.g., what a second °Code: https://github.com/pascanur/trainingRNNs
On the difficulty of training recurrent neural networks
sigmoid basic tanh smart tanh
1.0 1.0 1.0
, e--e MSGD
g's “ gi® gr — MSGD-C
30.6 e--- MSGD 30.6 e--e MSGD 30.6 * ewe MSGD-CR
2 -— MSGD-C 2 -—- MSGD-C 2 ‘
o4O ewe ~MSGD-CR {eo)y ) ewe ~MSGD-CR aoO ‘
isn) ive oO ¥
Toe Coe Toe ¥
0.0 0.0 jenmenes 0.0 ee reer
50 100 150 200 25 50 100 150 200 25 50 100 150 200 25
Sequence length Sequence length Sequence length
Figure 7. Rate of success for solving the temporal order problem versus sequence length for different initializations (from
left. to right: sigmoid, basic tanh and smart tanh). See text.
a long stream of discrete symbols. At the beginning any sequence of length 50 up to 200 (by providing
and middle of the sequence a symbol within {A,B} sequences of different random lengths in this interval
is emitted. The task consists in classifying the order for different MSGD steps). We achieve a success rate
(either AA, AB, BA, BB) at the end of the sequence. of 100% over 5 seeds in this regime as well (all runs
had 0 misclassified sequences in a set of 10000 ran-
Fig. 7 shows the success rate of standard mini-
domly generated sequences of different lengths). We
batch stochastic gradient descent MSGD, MSGD-C
used a RNN of 50 tanh units initialized in the “ba-
(MSGD enhanced with out clipping strategy) and
sic tanh” regime. The same trained model can
MSGD-CR (MSGD with the clipping strategy and
address sequences of length up to 5000 steps,
the regularization term) *. It was previously shown
lengths never seen during training. Specifically
(Sutskever, 2012) that initialization plays an impor-
the same model produced 0 mis-classified sequences
tant role for training RNNs. We consider three differ-
(out of 10000 sequences of same length) for lengths
ent initializations. “szgmozd’ is the most adversarial
of either 50, 100, 150, 200, 250, 500, 1000, 2000, 3000
initialization, where we use a sigmoid unit network
and 5000. ‘This provides some evidence that the model
where Wyec, Win, Wout ~ N(0,0.01). “basic tanh”
might use attractors to form some kind of long term
uses a tanh unit network where W,c., Win, Wout ~
memory, rather then relying on transient dynamics
N(0,0.1). “smart tanh” also uses tanh units and
(as for example ESN networks probably do in Jaeger
Win, Wout ~ N(0,0.01). Wyee is sparse (each unit
(2012)).
has only 15 non-zero incoming connections) with the
spectral radius fixed to 0.95. In all cases b = boxy = 0. 4.1.2. OTHER PATHOLOGICAL TASKS
The graph shows the success rate out of 5 runs (with
SGD-CR is able to solve (100% success on the lengths
different random seeds) for a 50 hidden unit model,
listed below, for all but one task) other pathological
where the x-axis contains the length of the sequence.
problems from Hochreiter and Schmidhuber (1997),
We use a constant learning rate of 0.01 with no mo-
namely the additzon problem, the multiplication prob-
mentum. When clipping the gradients, we used a
lem, the 3-bit temporal order problem, the random
threshold of 1.,and the regularization weight was fixed
permutation problem and the nozseless memorization
to 4. A run is successful if the number of misclassified
problem in two variants (when the pattern needed to
sequences was under 1% out of 10000 freshly random
be memorized is 5 bits in length and when it contains
generated sequences. We allowed a maximum number
over 20 bits of information; see Martens and Sutskever
of 5M updates, and use minibatches of 20 examples.
(2011)). For every task we used 5 different runs (with
This task provides empirical evidence that exploding different random seeds). For the first 4 problems we
gradients are linked with tasks that require long mem- used a single model for lengths up to 200, while for
ory traces. As the length of the sequence increases, the noiseless memorization we used a different model
using clipping becomes more important to achieve a for each sequence length (50, 100, 150 and 200). The
better success rate. More memory implies larger spec- hardest problems for which only two runs out of 5 suc-
tral radius, which leads to rich regimes where gradients ceeded was the random permutation problem. For the
are likely to explode. addition and multiplication task we observe successful
generalization to sequences up to 500 steps (we notice
Furthermore, we can train a single model to deal with
an increase in error with sequence length, though it
“When using just the regularization term, without clip- stays below 1%). Note that for the addition and mul-
ping, learning usually fails due to exploding gradients tiplication problem a sequence is misclassified with the
On the difficulty of training recurrent neural networks
Table 1. Results on polyphonic music prediction in negative log likelihood per time step and natural language task in bits
per character. Lower is better. Bold face shows state of the art for RNN models.
DATA SET DATA msap | Mscp+c | MSGD+CcR STATE OF THE || STATE OF THE
FOLD ART FOR RNN ART
PIANO-MIDI.DE TRAIN | 6.87 6.81 7.01 7.04 6.32
(NLL) TEST | 7.56 7.53 7.46 7.57 7.05
NOTTINGHAM TRAIN | 3.67 3.21 2.95 3.20 1.81
(NLL) TEST | 3.80 3.48 3.36 3.43 2.31
MUuSEDATA TRAIN | 8.25 6.54 6.43 6.47 5.20
(NLL) TEST | 7.11 7.00 6.97 6.99 5.60
PENN TREEBANK TRAIN | 1.46 1.34 1.36 N/A N/A
1 STEP (BITS/CHAR) | TEST | 1.50 1.42 1.41 1.41 1.37
PENN 'TREEBANK TRAIN | N/A 3.76 3.70 N/A N/A
5 STEPS (BITS/CHAR) | TEST | N/A 3.89 3.74 N/A N/A
square error is larger than .04. In most cases, these tropy model with up to 15-gram features has state of
results outperforms Martens and Sutskever (2011) in the art on Penn Treebank(character-level). However,
terms of success rate, they deal with longer sequences RNN models with some clipping strategy have state of
than in Hochreiter and Schmidhuber (1997) and com- the art for word modeling and character modeling on
pared to (Jaeger, 2012) they generalize to longer se- larger datasets (Mikolov et al., 2011; 2012)
quences. For details see supplementary materials.
For the polyphonic music prediction we have state of
4.2. Natural problems the art for RNN models, though RNN-NADE, a prob-
abilistic recurrent model, trained with Hessian Free
We address the task of polyphonic music prediction,
(Bengio et al., 2012) does better.
using the datasets Piano-midi.de, Nottingham and
MuseData described in Boulanger-Lewandowski et al. 5. Summary and conclusions
(2012) and language modelling at the character level
We provided different perspectives through which one
on the Penn Treebank dataset (Mikolov et al., 2012).
can gain more insight into the exploding and vanishing
We also explore a modified version of the task, where
gradients issue. We put forward a hypothesis stat-
we require to predict the 5th character in the future
ing that when gradients explode we have a cliff-like
(instead of the next). We assume that for solving this
structure in the error surface and devise a simple so-
modified task long term correlations are more impor-
lution based on this hypothesis, clipping the norm of
tant than short term ones, and hence our regulariza-
the exploded gradients. The effectiveness of our pro-
tion term should be more helpful.
posed solutions provides some indirect empirical evi-
The training and test scores for all natural problems dence towards the validity of our hypothesis, though
are reported in Table 1 as well as state of the art further investigations are required. In order to deal
for these tasks. See additional material for hyper- with the vanishing gradient problem we use a regular-
parameters and experimental setup. We note that ization term that forces the error signal not to vanish
keeping the regularization weight fixed (as for the pre- as it travels back in time. This regularization term
vious tasks) seems to harm learning. One needs to use forces the Jacobian matrices ox to preserve norm
a ¥/, decreasing schedule for this term. We hypothe- 4a-1
only in relevant directions. In practice we show that
sis that minimizing the regularization term affects the these solutions improve performance of RNNs on the
ability of the model to learn short term correlations pathological synthetic datasets considered, polyphonic
which are important for these tasks, though a more music prediction and language modelling.
careful investigation is lacking.
Acknowledgements
These results suggest that clipping solves an optimiza-
tion issue and does not act as a regularizer, as both We would like to thank Theano development team.
the training and test error improve in general. Results We acknowledge RQCHP, Compute Canada, NSERC,
on Penn ‘Treebank reach the state of the art for RNN FQRNT and CIFAR for the resources they provide.
achieved by Mikolov et al. (2012), who used a differ-
ent clipping algorithm similar to ours, thus providing
evidence that both behave similarly. A maximum en-
On the difficulty of training recurrent neural networks
References Jaeger, H. (2012). Long short-term memory in echo
state networks: Details of a simulation study. ‘Tech-
Bastien, F., Lamblin, P., Pascanu, R., Bergstra, J.,
nical report, Jacobs University Bremen.
Goodfellow, I., Bergeron, A., Bouchard, N., and
Bengio, Y. (2012). Theano: new features and speed Jaeger, H. and Haas, H. (2004). Harnessing nonlinear-
improvements. Submited to Deep Learning and Un- ity: predicting chaotic systems and saving energy
supervised Feature Learning NIPS 2012 Workshop. in wireless telecommunication. Science, 304(5667),
78-80.
Bengio, Y., Frasconi, P., and Simard, P. (1993). The
problem of learning long-term dependencies in re- Jaeger, H., Lukosevicius, M., Popovici, D., and Siew-
current networks. pages 1183-1195, San Francisco. ert, U. (2007). Optimization and applications of
IEEE Press. (invited paper). echo state networks with leaky- integrator neurons.
Neural Networks, 20(3), 335-352.
Bengio, Y., Simard, P., and Frasconi, P. (1994). Learn-
Martens, J. and Sutskever, I. (2011). Learning recur-
ing long-term dependencies with gradient descent is
rent neural networks with Hessian-free optimization.
difficult. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks,
In Proc. ICML’2011. ACM.
5(2), 157-166.
Mikolov, T. (2012). Statistical Language Models based
Bengio, Y., Boulanger-Lewandowski, N., and Pascanu,
on Neural Networks. Ph.D. thesis, Brno University
R. (2012). Advances in optimizing recurrent net-
of ‘Technology.
works. Technical Report arXiv:1212.0901, U. Mon-
treal. Mikolov, T., Deoras, A., Kombrink, 8., Burget, L.,
and Cernocky, J. (2011). Empirical evaluation and
Bergstra, J., Breuleux, O., Bastien, F., Lamblin, P.,
combination of advanced language modeling tech-
Pascanu, R., Desjardins, G., Turian, J., Warde-
niques. In Proc. 12th annual conference of the in-
Farley, D., and Bengio, Y. (2010). Theano: a CPU
ternational speech communication association (IN-
and GPU math expression compiler. In Proceedings
TERSPEECH 2011).
of the Python for Scientific Computing Conference
(SciPy). Oral Presentation. Mikolov, T., Sutskever, I., Deoras, A., Le, H.-S.,
Kombrink, $., and Cernocky, J. (2012). Subword
Boulanger-Lewandowski, N., Bengio, Y., and Vincent, language modeling with neural networks. preprint
P. (2012). Modeling temporal dependencies in high- (http://www.fit.vutbr.cz/ imikolov/rnnlm/char.pdf).
dimensional sequences: Application to polyphonic
Pascanu, R. and Jaeger, H. (2011). A neurodynamical
music generation and transcription. In Proceed-
model for working memory. Neural Netw., 24, 199-
ings of the Twenty-nine International Conference on
207.
Machine Learning (ICML’12). ACM.
Rumelhart, D. E., Hinton, G. E., and Williams,
Doya, K. (1993). Bifurcations of recurrent neural net-
R. J. (1986). Learning representations by back-
works in gradient descent learning. [KEE Transac-
propagating errors. Nature, 323(6088), 533-536.
tions on Neural Networks, 1, 75-80.
Strogatz, S. (1994). Nonlinear Dynamics And Chaos:
Doya, K. and Yoshizawa, S. (1991). Adaptive synchro-
With Applications To Physics, Biology, Chemistry,
nization of neural and physical oscillators. In J. E.
And Engineering (Studies in Nonlinearity). Studies
Moody, S. J. Hanson, and R. Lippmann, editors,
in nonlinearity. Perseus Books Group, 1 edition.
NIPS, pages 109-116. Morgan Kaufmann.
Sutskever, I. (2012). Training Recurrent Neural Net-
Elman, J. (1990). Finding structure in time. Cognitive works. Ph.D. thesis, University of Toronto.
Science, 14(2), 179-211.
Sutskever, I., Martens, J., and Hinton, G. (2011).
Graves, A., Liwicki, M., Fernandez, $., Bertolami, R.., Generating text with recurrent neural networks. In
Bunke, H., and Schmidhuber, J. (2009). A Novel L. Getoor and T. Scheffer, editors, Proceedings of the
Connectionist System for Unconstrained Handwrit- 28th International Conference on Machine Learning
ing Recognition. JEEE Transactions on Pattern (ICML-11), ICML ’11, pages 1017-1024, New York,
Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 31(5), 855-868. NY, USA. ACM.
Hochreiter, 5. and Schmidhuber, J. (1997). Long Werbos, P. J. (1988). Generalization of backpropa-
short-term memory. Neural Computation, 9(8), gation with application to a recurrent gas market
model. Neural Networks, 1(4), 339-356.
1735-1780.