Derivatives, Backpropagation, and Vectorization
Justin Johnson
September 6, 2017
1 Derivatives
1.1 Scalar Case
You are probably familiar with the concept of a derivative in the scalar case:
given a function f : R > R, the derivative of f at a point x © R is defined as:
f(x) = tam LOM = FO)
h—0 h
Derivatives are a way to measure change. In the scalar case, the derivative
of the function f at the point x tells us how much the function f changes as the
input « changes by a small amount e¢:
flute)» f(x) tef'(x)
For ease of notation we will commonly assign a name to the output of f,
say y = f(x), and write ou for the derivative of y with respect to x. This
notation emphasizes that a is the rate of change between the variables 7 and
y; concretely if x were to change by ¢ then y will change by approximately oot.
We can write this relationship as
xoatAr = yom y + O5 Aw
x
You should read this as saying “changing « to x + Az implies that y will
change to approximately y + Ax Se”, This notation is nonstandard, but I like
it since it emphasizes the relationship between changes in x and changes in y.
The chain rule tells us how to compute the derivative of the compositon of
functions. In the scalar case suppose that f,g:R— R and y = f(x), z = g(y);
then we can also write z = (gof)(x), or draw the following computational graph:
eh y > z
The (scalar) chain rule tells us that
dz _ dz dy
dx «Oy Ox
This equation makes intuitive sense. The derivatives 5S and ou give:
xoatAr = yoy t+ OSo Ae
x
Oz
yrytAy => zm e+ a Ay
y
Combining these two rules lets us compute the effect of x on z: if x changes
by Az then y will change by SU Ag, so we have Ay = SY Ag, If y changes by
Ay then z will change by ae Ay = 5s oY Ax which is exactly what the chain rule
tells us.
1.2 Gradient: Vector in, scalar out
This same intuition carries over into the vector case. Now suppose that f :
R —+ R takes a vector as input and produces a scalar. The derivative of f at
the point x € R® is now called the gradient, and it is defined as:
Sete) = tim EFM =F)
h—->0 || |
Now the gradient V,f(z) € R% is a vector, with the same intuition as the
scalar case. If we set y = f(x) then we have the relationship
xoatAr = yorytO.Ag
Ox
The formula changes a bit from the scalar case to account for the fact that
x,Ax, and ou are now vectors in R‘ while y is a scalar. In particular when
multiplying 5O7y by Ax we use the dot product, which combines two vectors to
give a scalar.
One nice outcome of this formula is that it gives meaning to the individual
elements of the gradient oy Suppose that Az is the ith basis vector, so that
the 7th coordinate of € is | and all other coordinates of ¢ are 0. Then the dot
product oy - Ax is simply the ith coordinate of ae thus the 7th coordinate of
x
ou tells us the approximate amount by which y will change if we move x along
the ith coordinate axis.
This means that we can also view the gradient Sy as a vector of partial
derivatives:
Oy — ( Oy Oy Oy
Ox \ Ox,’ OxoO’rn
where x; is the zth coordinate of the vector x, which is a scalar, so each
partial derivative oe is also a scalar.
1.3. Jacobian: Vector in, Vector out
Now suppose that f : RY + RTM takes a vector as input and produces a vector
as output. Then the derivative of f at a point x, also called the Jacobian, is
the M x N matrix of partial derivatives. If we again set y = f(a) then we can
write:
Oy, ON
Oy Orr EN
Ox ~~ : :
Oym ... OYyM
Or, OxN
The Jacobian tells us the relationship between each element of « and each
element of y: the (i, 7)-th element of ou is equal to su , so it tells us the amount
by which y; will change if x; is changed by a small amount.
Just as in the previous cases, the Jacobian tells us the relationship between
changes in the input and changes in the output:
xoatAr = yoy t Mara
Here ou is a M x N matrix and Az is an N-dimensional vector, so the
product SY Ax is a matrix-vector multiplication resulting in an A/-dimensional
vector.
The chain rule can be extended to the vector case using Jacobian matrices.
Suppose that f : RY > R” andg:RTM” > R*. Let x € RX, y € RTM, and
z €R* with y = f(x) and z = g(y), so we have the same computational graph
as the scalar case:
chy Sz
The chain rule also has the same form as the scalar case:
Oz Oz Oy
Ox = Oy Ox
However now each of these terms is a matrix: 5S isa K x M matrix, ou is
a Mx N matrix, and ge isa K x N matrix; the multiplication of Ge and Oy :
dx 8
matrix multiplication.
1.4 Generalized Jacobian: Tensor in, Tensor out
Just as a vector is a one-dimensional list of numbers and a matrix is a two-
dimensional grid of numbers, a tensor is a D-dimensional grid of numbers.
Many operations in deep learning accept tensors as inputs and produce
tensors as outputs. For example an image is usually represented as a three-
dimensional grid of numbers, where the three dimensions correspond to the
height, width, and color channels (red, green, blue) of the image. We must
therefore develop a derivative that is compatible with functions operating on
general tensors.
Suppose now that f : RAI" *Noe —~ RTM1Xx<Mpy Then the input to f
is a D,-dimensional tensor of shape Ni; x --- x Np,, and the output of f is a
D,-dimensional tensor of shape M, x--- x Mp,. If y = f(a) then the derivative
ou is a generalized Jacobian, which is an object with shape
(My x +--+ x Mp,) x (N1 x+++ x Np,)
Note that we have separated the dimensions of Sy into two groups: the
first group matches the dimensions of y and the second group matches the
dimensions of x. With this grouping, we can think of the generalized Jacobian
as generalization of a matrix, where each “row” has the same shape as y and
each “column” has the same shape as x.
Now if we let ¢ € Z?» and j € Z?* be vectors of integer indices, then we
can write
Oy _ OY
Or), ; Ox;
In this equation note that y; and x; are scalars, so the derivative otY.i is
also a scalar. Using this notation we see that like the standard Jacobian, ‘the
generalized Jacobian tells us the relative rates of change between all elements
of x and all elements of y.
The generalized Jacobian gives the same relationship between inputs and
outputs as before:
xoatAr = yoy t+ OSo Ae
x
The difference is that now Az is a tensor of shape N; x --- x Np, and ou
is a generalized matrix of shape (M, x --- x Mp,) x (Ni x +++ x Np,). The
product oY Ax is therefore a generalized matrix-vector multiply, which results in
a tensor of shape M; x --- x Mp,.
The generalized matrix-vector multipy follows the same algebraic rules as a
traditional matrix-vector multiply:
lThe word tensor is used in different ways in different fields; you may have seen the term
before in physics or abstract algebra. The machine learning definition of a tensor as a D-
dimensional grid of numbers is closely related to the definitions of tensors in these other
fields.
Oy Oy Oy
“7A — “7 Ar); ={—2) -A
Jj i 4) jy
The only difference is that the indicies i and 7 are not scalars; instead they
are vectors of indicies. In the equation above the term (34) is the gth “row”
dst
of the generalized matrix oo which is a tensor with the same shape as x. We
have also used the convention that the dot product between two tensors of the
same shape is an elementwise product followed by a sum, identical to the dot
product between vectors.
The chain rule also looks the same in the case of tensor-valued functions.
Suppose that y = f(x) and z = g(y), where x and y have the same shapes as
above and z has shape Ky x --- x Kp,. Now the chain rule looks the same as
before:
Oz Oz Oy
dx «Oy Ox
The difference is that now Ge is a generalized matrix of shape (Ky x--- x Kp,) x
(M, x---x Mp,), and ou is a generalized matrix of shape (M x --- x Mp,) x
(Ni x +--+ x Np,); the product oe Fu is a generalized matrix-matrix multiply,
resulting in an object of shape (Ay x --- x Kp,) x (Ni x --: x Np,). Like
the generalized matrix-vector multiply defined above, the generalized matrix-
matrix multiply follows the same algebraic rules as the traditional matrix-matrix
multiply:
Ox ij d Oy ik Ox hej Oy i: Ox 5
In this equation the indices 7, 7,k are vectors of indices, and the terms (O3z)
L.
and (3). ; are the 7th “row” of 5s and the jth “column” of ou respectively.
2 Backpropagation with Tensors
In the context of neural networks, a layer f is typically a function of (tensor)
inputs x and weights w; the (tensor) output of the layer is then y = f(z, w).
The layer f is typically embedded in some large neural network with scalar loss
L.
During backpropagation, we assume that we are given ce and our goal is to
compute gL and gh By the chain rule we know that
OL _ OL Oy OL _ OL Oy
dx Oy Ox dw Oy Ow
Therefore one way to proceed would be to form the (generalized) Jacobians
Sy and ou and use (generalized) matrix multiplication to compute gL and gh
However, there’s a problem with this approach: the Jacobian matrices ou and
a are typically far too large to fit in memory.
As a concrete example, let’s suppose that f is a linear layer that takes as
input a minibatch of N vectors, each of dimension D, and produces a minibatch
of N vectors, each of dimension M. Then x is a matrix of shape N x D, w isa
matrix of shape D x M, and y = f(x, w) = cw is a matrix of shape N x M.
The Jacobian oy then has shape (N x M) x (N x D). In a typical neural
network we might have N = 64 and M = D = 4096; then ou consists of
64 - 4096 - 64 - 4096 scalar values; this is more than 68 billion numbers; using
32-bit floating point, this Jacobian matrix will take 256 GB of memory to store.
Therefore it is completely hopeless to try and explicitly store and manipulate
the Jacobian matrix.
However it turns out that for most common neural network layers, we can
derive expressions that compute the produc ne Sh without explicitly forming
the Jacobian a Even better, we can typically derive this expression without
even computing an explicit expression for the Jacobian ot in many cases we
can work out a small case on paper and then infer the general formula.
Let’s see how this works out for the case of the linear layer f(z,w) = rw.
Set N=1, D=2, M=3. Then we can explicitly write
y= (yi Y1,2 y1,3) = rw (1)
= (a14 1,2) W141 W1,2 W1,3 (2)
W2,1 W2,2 W2,3
X14 1W11 + ©1,2W24
= | %11W1,2 + 21,222 (3)
L11W1,3 + 1 2W2,3
During backpropagation we assume that we have access to 5e which tech-
nically has shape (1) x (N x M); however for notational convenience we will
instead think of it as a matrix of shape N x M. Then we can write
B O y L 7 (ty dyi,2 dyi,3)
Our goal now is to derive an expression for gh in terms of 7, w, and oe
without explicitly forming the entire Jacobian a We know that oh will have
shape (1) x (N x D), but as is typical for representing gradients we instead view
gL as a matrix of shape N x D. We know that each element of gL is a scalar
giving the partial derivatives of L with respect to the elements of a:
ot = (32 au)
Ox —_ O£1,1 Ox1,2
Thinking one element at a time, the chain rule tells us that
OL OL oy
(4)
0X11 7 Oy A214
OL OL oy
(5)
0x12 7 Oy O12
Viewing these derivatives as generalized matrices, ce has shape (1)x (NxM)
and =2" has shape (xN M)x (1); their product alt then has shape (1) x (1). If
Ox£1,1
1,1
we instead view ce and Oy~ as matrices of shape N x M, then their generalized
4 QL. _Oy
matrix product is simply the dot produc Dy
0x11 .
Now we compute
Oy _ (es OY1,2 se | _ (wy 1
W142 w1,3) (6)
0211 Ox1,1 Ox£1,1 Ox£1,1
Oy (ses OY1,2 se |
=(w21 We2 w23) (7)
0X12 O£1,2 O£1,2 O£1,2
where the final equality comes from taking the derivatives of Equation 3 with
respect to 41,1.
We can now combine these results and write
aL aL Oy
5 = dy 11,1 + dy12W1,2 + dy1 31,3
Oxi, Oy
£11
aL aL Oy
5 = dy1,1W2,1 + dy1,2w22 + dy13w23
Or12 Oy
L1,2
This gives us our final expression for 5a7L:.
aL _ OL OL )
(10)
Aa O0x1,1 0x1,2
T
dy11W1,1 + dy12W1,2 + dyi3W1,3
(11)
dy, 1W2,1 + dy1,2w2,2 + dyi1.3W2,3
OL
(12)
Oy
This final result 24 = 5OL, 2,.T is very interesting because it allows us to
On
y
efficiently compute 4OL- without explicitly forming the Jacobian oyy We have
only derived this formula for the specific case of N = 1, D = 2, M = 3 but it in
fact holds in general.
By a similar thought process we can derive a similar expression for L with-
Ww
out explicitly forming the Jacobian $7)%. You should try and work through this
F)WwW
as an exercise.