A Comparative Analysis of Object Detection Metrics with a Companion Open-Source Toolkit | MDPI 12/7/25, 3:45 AM
(oOmor, Journals Topics
Author Services Information About Search all articles Sign in
go
You are currently viewing a new version of our website. To view the old version click here.
Home Journals Electronics Volume 10, Issue 3 10.3390/electronics10030279
3 Electronics
Cite Share
| Abstract Article @ 24 January 2021
Introduction A Comparative Analysis of Object Detection Metrics with
An Overview of Selected Works on Object a Companion Open-Source Toolkit
Detection
Bounding Box Formats
Rafael Padilla”, Wesley L. Passos, Thadeu L. B. Dias, Sergio L. Netto and Eduardo A.B. da Silva
Performance Metrics
Electrical Engineering Program/Alberto Luiz Coimbra Institute for Post-Graduation and Research in Engineering
A Numerical Example (PEE/COPPE), PO Box 68504, Rio de Janeiro 21941-972, RJ, Brazil
“Author to whom correspondence should be addressed.
Most Employed Metrics Based on AP and
AR Electronics 2021, 10(3), 279; https://doi.org/10.3390/electronics10030279
Evaluating Object Detection in Videos This article belongs to the Special Issue Deep Learning Based Object Detection
An Open-Source Toolbox
Version Notes Order Reprints
Metrics Evaluation in a Practical Example
Conclusions
Author Contributions Abstract
Funding
Recent outstanding results of supervised object detection in competitions and challenges are often
Data Availability Statement
associated with specific metrics and datasets. The evaluation of such methods applied in different contexts
Acknowledgments have increased the demand for annotated datasets. Annotation tools represent the location and size of
Conflicts of Interest objects in distinct formats, leading to a lack of consensus on the representation. Such a scenario often
complicates the comparison of object detection methods. This work alleviates this problem along the
References
following lines: (i) It provides an overview of the most relevant evaluation methods used in object detection
Article Metrics
competitions, highlighting their peculiarities, differences, and advantages; (ii) it examines the most used
annotation formats, showing how different implementations may influence the assessment results; and (iii)
it provides a novel open-source toolkit supporting different annotation formats and 15 performance metrics,
making it easy for researchers to evaluate the performance of their detection algorithms in most known
datasets. In addition, this work proposes a new metric, also included in the toolkit, for evaluating object
detection in videos that is based on the spatio-temporal overlap between the ground-truth and detected
bounding boxes.
Keywords: object-detection metrics; precision; recall; evaluation; automatic assessment; bounding boxes
1. Introduction
The human visual system can effectively distinguish objects in different environments and contexts, even
under a variety of constraints such as low illumination [1], color differences [2], and occlusions [3,4]. In
addition, objects are key to the understanding of a scene’s context, which lends paramount importance to
the estimation of their precise location and classification. This has led computer vision researchers to
explore automatic object detection for decades [5], reaching impressive results particularly in the last few
years [6,7,8,9].
Object detection algorithms attempt to locate general occurrences of one or more predefined classes of
objects. In a system designed to detect pedestrians, for instance, an algorithm tries to locate all
pedestrians that appear within an image or a video [3,10,11]. In the identification task, however, an algorithm
tries to recognize a specific instance of a given class of objects. In the pedestrian example, an identification
https://jwww.mdpi.com/2079-9292/10/3/279
lsaeno
mn
~
=
rT
~~
=eS
N
~~
Page 1 of 26
A Comparative Analysis of Object Detection Metrics with a Companion Open-Source Toolkit | MDPI 12/7/25, 3:45 AM
algorithm wants to determine the identity of each pedestrian previously detected.
Initially, real-time object detection applications were limited to only one object type [12] at a time, mostly
due to hardware limitations. Later on, advancements in object detection techniques led to their increasing
adoption in areas that included the manufacturing industry with optical inspections [13], video surveillance
[14], forensics [15,16], medical image analysis [17,18,19], autonomous vehicles [20], and traffic monitoring
[21]. In the last decade, the use of deep neural networks (DNNs) has completely changed the landscape of
the computer vision field [22]. DNNs have allowed for drastic improvements in image classification, image
segmentation, anomaly detection, optical character recognition (OCR), action recognition, image
generation, and object detection [5].
The field of object detection has yielded significant improvements in both efficiency and accuracy. To
validate such improvements, new techniques must be assessed against current state-of-the-art
approaches, preferably over widely available datasets. However, benchmark datasets and evaluation
metrics differ from work to work, often making their comparative assessment confusing and misleading. We
identified two main reasons for such confusion in comparative assessments:
e There are often differences in bounding box representation formats among different detectors. Boxes
could be represented, for instance by their upper-left corner coordinates (x, y) and their absolute
dimensions (width, height) in pixels, or by their relative coordinates( , )and dimensions
, with the values normalized by the image size, among others;
e Each performance assessment tool implements a set of different metrics, requiring specific formats for
the ground-truth and detected bounding boxes.
Even though many tools have been developed to convert the annotated boxes from one format to another,
the quality assessment of the final detections still lacks a tool compatible with different bounding box
formats and multiple metrics. Our previous work [23] contributed to the research community in this
direction, by presenting a tool which reads ground-truth and detected bounding boxes in a closed format
and evaluates the detections using the average precision (AP) and mean average precision (MAP) metrics,
as required in the PASCAL Challenge [24]. In this work that contribution is significantly expanded by
incorporating 13 other metrics, as well as by supporting additional annotation formats into the developed
open-source toolbox. The new evaluation tool is available at https:/github.com/rafaelpadilla/review_object
detection_metrics. We believe that our work significantly simplifies the task of evaluating object detection
algorithms.
This work intends to explain in detail the computation of the most popular metrics used as benchmarks by
the research community, particularly in online challenges and competitions, providing their mathematical
foundations and a practical example to illustrate their applicability. In order to do so, after a brief
contextualization of the object-detection field in Section 2, the most common annotation formats and
assessment metrics are examined in Section 3 and Section 4, respectively. A numerical example is
provided in Section 5 illustrating the previous concepts from a practical perspective. Popular metrics are
further addressed in Section 6. In Section 7 object detection in videos is discussed from an integrated
spatio-temporal point of view, and a new metric for videos is provided. Section 8 presents an open-source
and freely distributed toolkit that implements all discussed concepts in a unified and validated way, as
verified in Section 9. Finally, Section 10 concludes the paper by summarizing its main technical
contributions.
2. An Overview of Selected Works on Object Detection
Back in the mid-50s and 6Os the first attempts to recognize simple patterns in images were published
[25,26]. These works identified primitive shapes and convex polygons based on contours. In the mid-80s,
more complex shapes started gaining meaning, such as in [27], which described an automated process to
construct a three-dimensional geometric description of an airplane.
To describe more complex objects, instead of characterizing them by their shapes, automated feature
extraction methods were developed. Different methods attempted to find important feature points that
when combined could describe objects broadly. Robust feature points are represented by distinctive pixels,
https://jwww.mdpi.com/2079-9292/10/3/279 Page 2 of 26
A Comparative Analysis of Object Detection Metrics with a Companion Open-Source Toolkit | MDPI 12/7/25, 3:45 AM
whose neighborhood describe the same object irrespective of changes in pose, rotation, and illumination.
The Harris detector [28] finds such points in the object corners based on local intensity changes. A local
search algorithm using gradients was devised in [29] to solve the image registration problem, which later
was expanded to a tracking algorithm [30] for identifying important points in videos.
More robust methods were able to identify characteristic pixel points and represent them as feature
vectors. The so-called scale invariant feature transform (SIFT) [31], for instance, applied the difference of
Gaussians in several scales coupled with histograms of gradients, yielding characteristic points with
features that are robust to scale changes and rotation. Another popular feature detector and descriptor, the
speed up robust features (SURF) [32], was claimed to be faster and more robust than SIFT, and uses a blob
detector based on the Hessian matrix for interest point detection and wavelet responses for feature
representations.
Feature-point representation methods alone are not able to perform object detection, but can help in
extracting a group of keypoints that are used to represent them. In [33], the SIFT keypoints and features are
used to detect humans in images, and in [34] SIFT was combined with color histograms to classify regions
of interest across frames to track objects in videos. Another powerful feature extractor widely applied for
object detection is the histogram of oriented gradients (HOG) [35], which is computed for several image
small cells. The histograms of each cell are combined to form the object descriptor, which, associated to a
classifier, can perform the object detection task [35,36].
The Viola-Jones object detection framework was described in the path-breaking work of [12]. It could
detect a single class object at a rate of 15 frames per second. The proposed algorithm employed a cascade
of weak classifiers to process image patches of different sizes, being able to associate bounding boxes to
the target object. The Viola-Jones method was first applied to face detection and required extensive
training to automatically select a group of Haar-features to represent the target object, thus detecting one
class of objects at a time. This framework has been extended to detect other object classes such as
pedestrians [10,11] and cars [87].
More recently, with the growth and popularization of deep learning in computer vision problems
[6,7,38,39,40], object detection algorithms have started to develop from a new perspective [41,42]. The
traditional feature extraction [81,32,35] phase is performed by convolutional neural networks (CNNs), which
are dominating computer vision research in many fields. Due to their spatial invariance, convolutions
perform feature extraction spatially and can be combined into layers to produce the desired feature maps.
The network end is usually composed of fully connected (FC) layers that can perform classification and
regression tasks. The output is then compared to a desired result and the network parameters are adjusted
to minimize a given loss function. The advantage of using DNNs in object detection tasks is the fact that
their architectures can extract features and predict bounding boxes in the same pipeline, allowing efficient
end-to-end training. The more layers a network has, the more complex features it is able to extract, but the
more parameters it needs to learn, demanding more computer processing power and data.
When itis not feasible to acquire more real data, data augmentation techniques are used to generate
artificial but realistic data. Color and geometric operations and changes inside the target object area are
the main actions performed by data augmentation methods for object detection tasks [43]. The work in [44]
applied generative adversarial networks (GANSs) to increase by 10 times the amount of medical chest
images to detect patients with COVID-19. In [45], the number of images was increased by applying filters in
astronomy images so as to improve the performance of galaxy detectors.
The CNN-based object detectors may be cataloged as single-shot or region-based detectors, also known
as one- or two-stage detectors, respectively. The single-shot detectors work by splitting the images into a
grid of cells. For each cell, they make bounding-box guesses of different scales and aspect ratios. This type
of detector prioritizes speed rather than accuracy, aiming to predict both bounding box and class
simultaneously. Overfeat [46] was one of the first single-shot detectors, followed by the single shot
multiBox detector (SSD) [47], and all versions of you only look once (YOLO) [9,48,49,50,51]. The region-
based detectors perform the detection in two steps. First, they generate a sparse set of region proposals in
the image where the objects are supposed to be. The second stage classifies each object proposal and
refines its estimated position. The region-based convolutional neural network (R-CNN) [52] was a pioneer
https://jwww.mdpi.com/2079-9292/10/3/279 Page 3 of 26
A Comparative Analysis of Object Detection Metrics with a Companion Open-Source Toolkit | MDPI 12/7/25, 3:45 AM
employing CNNs in this last stage, achieving significant gains in accuracy. Later works such as Fast R-CNN
[53], Faster R-CNN [8], and region-based fully convolutional networks (R-FCN) [54] suggest changes in R-
CNN to improve its speed. The aforementioned detectors have some heuristic and hand-crafted steps
such as region feature extraction or non-maximum suppression to remove duplicate detections. In this
context, graph neural networks (GNNs) are employed to compute region of interest features in a more
efficient way and process the objects simultaneously by modeling them according to their appearance
feature and geometry [55,56].
Hybrid solutions combining different approaches have been proposed lately and have proved to be more
robust in various object-detection applications. The work in [57] proposes a hybrid solution involving a
genetic algorithm and CNNs to classify small objects (structures) presented in microscopy images. Feature
descriptors coupled with a cuckoo search algorithm were applied by the authors of [58] to detect vessels in
a marine environment using synthetic aperture radar (SAR) images. This approach was compared to
genetic algorithms and neural network models individually, improving precision to nearly 96.2%. Vision-
based autonomous vehicles can also benefit from hybrid models as shown in [59], where a system
integrating different approaches was developed to detect and identify pedestrians and to predict their
movements. In the context of detecting objects using depth information, the work in [60] proposes a hybrid
attention neural network that incorporates depth and high-level RGB features to produce an attention map
to remove background information.
Other works aim to detect the most important region of interest and segment relevant objects using salient
object detectors. The work in [61] proposes a pipeline to separate an input image into a pair of images using
content-preserving transforms. Then, each resulting image is passed by an interweaved convolutional
neural network, which extracts complementary information of the image pairs and fuses them into the final
salient map.
As medical images are acquired with special equipment, they form a very specific type of image [17]. To
detect lesions, organs, and other structures of interest can be crucial for a precise diagnostic. However,
most object detection systems are designed for general applications and usually do not perform well in
medical images without adaptations [62]. Detecting anomalies such as glaucoma, breast, and lung lesions,
for instance, have been explored from the medical object-detection perspective in [63,64]. In the medical
field, training and testing data usually have significant differences due to data scarcity and privacy. In order
to address this issue, a domain adaptation framework, referred to as clustering CNNs (CLU-CNNs) [65], has
been proposed to improve the generalization capability without specific domain training.
With new object detection methods being constantly released, it is highly desirable that a consensual
evaluation procedure is established. To do so, the most common bounding box formats used by public
datasets and competitions are revised in the next section.
3. Bounding Box Formats
Given the large, ever growing number of object detectors based on supervised methods in different areas,
specific datasets have been built to train these systems. Popular competitions such as the common objects
in context (COCO) [66], PASCAL visual object classes (VOC) [67], and Open Images Dataset [68] offer
annotated datasets so that participants can train and evaluate their models before submission. Apart from
using available datasets, collecting data for a object detection task can be quite challenging, as labeling
images and videos is often a manual and quite demanding exercise. The medical field provides a good
example of this fact: Developing a database of X-ray, electroencephalography (EEG),
magnetoencephalography (MEG), or electrocardiography (ECG) images involves not only high costs for
capturing such signals, but also requires expert knowledge to interpret and annotate them.
To ease the object annotation process in images and videos, many tools have been developed to annotate
different datasets. Such tools basically offer the same features, such as bounding-box annotations and
polygon-like silhouettes, as shown in Figure 1.
https://jwww.mdpi.com/2079-9292/10/3/279 Page 4 of 26
A Comparative Analysis of Object Detection Metrics with a Companion Open-Source Toolkit | MDPI 12/7/25, 3:45 AM
Figure 1. Two different types of annotated images from Openlmage [68]: (a) Bounding box annotations; (b)
Silhouette annotations (in yellowish-green), also referred to as segmentation and pixel-level annotations.
A vast amount of annotation tools are freely available. Table 1 lists the most popular ones with their
respective bounding box output formats.
Table 1. Popular free annotation tools and their supported output formats.
Some datasets introduced new formats to represent their annotations, which are usually named after the
datasets themselves. The PASCAL VOC dataset [67] established the PASCAL VOC XML format and the
COCO dataset [66] represents their annotations in the COCO format, embodied in a JSON file. Annotation
tools also brought further formats. For example, CVAT [72], a popular annotation tool, outputs bounding
boxes in multiple formats, including its own specific XML-based one, named a CVAT format. The most
popular bounding box formats shown in Table 1 are described in more detail. Note that whenever we refer to
absolute coordinates, we mean coordinates that are expressed on the image coordinate frame, as opposed
to coordinates that are normalized by the image width or image height.
1. PASCAL VOC: It consists of one XML file for each image containing none, one or multiple bounding
boxes. The upper-left and bottom-right pixel coordinates are absolute. Each bounding box also contains
a tag representing the class of the object. Extra information about the labeled object can be provided,
such as whether, the object extends beyond the bounding box or it is partially occluded. The annotations
in the ImageNet [74] and PASCAL VOC [67] datasets are provided using the PASCAL VOC format;
COCO: It is represented by a single JSON file containing all bounding boxes of a given dataset. The
classes of the objects are listed separately in the categories tag and identified by an jd. The image file
corresponding to an annotation is also indicated in a separate element (images) that contains its file
name and is referenced by an id. The bounding boxes and their object classes are listed in a different
element (annotations), with their top-left coordinates being absolute, and with explicit values of
width and height;
LabelMe: The bounding-box annotations in this format are inserted in a single JSON file for each image,
containing a list of boxes represented bytheir absolute upper-left and bottom-right coordinates. Besides
the class of the object, this format also contains the image data encoded in base64 type, thus making
the LabelMe format to consume more storage space than others;
YOLO: One TXT file per image is used in this representation. Each line of the file contains the class id and
the bounding box coordinates. An extra file is needed to map the class id to the class name. The
bounding box coordinates are not absolute, being represented by the format (
). The advantage of representing the boxes in this format is
that, if the image dimensions are scaled, the bounding box coordinates do not change, and thus the
annotation file does not have to be altered. This type of format is the one preferred by those who
annotate images in one resolution and need to scale their dimensions to fulfill the input shape
requirement of a specific CNN. The YOLO object detector needs bounding boxes in this format to
https://jwww.mdpi.com/2079-9292/10/3/279 Page 5 of 26
A Comparative Analysis of Object Detection Metrics with a Companion Open-Source Toolkit | MDPI 12/7/25, 3:45 AM
execute training;
5. VoTT: This representation of the bounding boxes coordinates and object class is made in a JSON file
(one file per image) and the coordinates are expressed as the width, height and upper-left pixel
position in absolute coordinates. The Visual Object Tagging Tool (VoTT) produces annotations in this
format;
6. CVAT: It consists of a unique XML file with all bounding boxes in the dataset represented by the upper-
left and bottom-right pixel absolute coordinates. This format has been created with the CVAT annotation
tool;
7. TFRecord: This is a serialized representation of the whole dataset containing all images and annotations
in a single file. This format is recognized by the Tensorflow library [75];
8. Tensorflow Object Detection: This is a CSV file containing all labeled bounding boxes of the dataset. The
bounding box format is represented by the upper-left and bottom-right pixel absolute coordinates. This
is also a widely used format employed by the Tensorflow library;
9. Open Images Dataset: This format is associated with the Open Images Dataset [68] to annotate its
ground-truth bounding boxes. All annotations are written in a unique CSV file listing the name of the
images and labels, as well as upper-left and bottom-right absolute coordinates of the bounding boxes.
Extra information about the labeled object is conveyed by other tags such as, for example, /sOcclude,
IsGroupOf, and IsTruncated.
As each dataset is annotated using a specific format, works tend to employ the evaluation tools provided
along with the datasets to assess their performance. Therefore, their results are dependent on the specific
metric implementation associated with the used dataset. For example, the PASCAL VOC dataset employs
the PASCAL VOC annotation format, which provides a MATLAB code implementing the metrics AP and mAP
(intersection over union (IOU)=.50). This tends to inhibit the use of other metrics to report results obtained
for this particular dataset. Table 2 lists popular object detection methods along with the datasets and the 14
different metrics used to report their results, namely: AP@[.5:.05:.95], AP@.50, AP@.75, APs, APy, AP, AR},
ARio, ARioo, ARs, AR, ARL, MAP (IOU=.50), and AP.
Table 2. Popular object detection methods along with the datasets and metrics used to report their results.
As the evaluation metrics are directly associated with a given annotation format, almost all works report
their results only for the metrics implemented for the benchmarking dataset. For example, MAP (IOU=.50) is
reported when the PASCAL VOC dataset is used, while AP@[.5:.05:.95] is applied to report results on the
COCO dataset. If a work uses the COCO dataset to train a model and wants to evaluate their results with the
PASCAL VOC tool, it will be necessary to convert the ground-truth COCO JSON format to the PASCAL VOC
XML format. This scenario discourages the use of such cross-dataset assessments, which have become
quite rare in the object detection literature.
An example of confusions that may arise in such a scenario is given by the fact that some works affirm that
the metrics AP@.50 and mAP (lIOU=.50) are the same [54], which may not always be true. The origins of
such misunderstandings are the differences in how each tool computes the corresponding metrics. The
next section deals with this problem by detailing the implementations of the several object detection
metrics and pointing out their differences.
4. Performance Metrics
Challenges and online competitions have pushed forward the frontier of the object detection field,
improving results for specific datasets in every new edition. To validate the submitted results, each
competition applies a specific metric to rank the submitted detections. These assessment criteria have
https://jwww.mdpi.com/2079-9292/10/3/279 Page 6 of 26
A Comparative Analysis of Object Detection Metrics with a Companion Open-Source Toolkit | MDPI 12/7/25, 3:45 AM
also been used by the research community to report and compare object detection methods using
different datasets as illustrated in Table2.Among the popular metrics to report the results, this section will
cover those used by the most popular competitions, namely Open Images RVC [81], COCO Detection
Challenge [82], VOC Challenge [24], Datalab Cup [83], Google Al Open Images challenge [84], Lyft 3D
Object Detection for Autonomous Vehicles [85], and City Intelligence Hackathon [86]. Object detectors aim
to predict the location of objects of a given class in an image or video with a high confidence. They do so by
placing bounding boxes to identify the positions of the objects. Therefore, a detection is represented by a
set of three attributes: The object class, the corresponding bounding box, and the confidence score, usually
given by a value between O and 1 showing how confident the detector is about that prediction. The
assessment is done based on:
® Aset of ground-truth bounding boxes representing the rectangular areas of an image containing objects
of the class to be detected, and
e aset of detections predicted by a model, each one consisting of a bounding box, a class, anda
confidence value.
Detection evaluation metrics are used to quantify the performance of detection algorithms in different
areas and fields [87,88]. In the case of object detection, the employed evaluation metrics measure how
close the detected bounding boxes are to the ground-truth bounding boxes. This measurement is done
independently for each object class, by assessing the amount of overlap of the predicted and ground-truth
areas.
Consider a target object to be detected represented by a ground-truth bounding box and the detected
area represented by a predicted bounding box _ . Without taking into account a confidence level, a perfect
match is considered when the area and location of the predicted and ground-truth boxes are the same.
These two conditions are assessed by the intersection over union (lIOU), a measurement based on the
Jaccard Index, a coefficient of similarity for two sets of data [89]. In the object detection scope, the IOU is
equal to the area of the overlap (intersection) between the predicted bounding box and the ground-truth
bounding box divided by the area of their union, that is:
as illustrated in Figure 2.
Figure 2. Illustration of the intersection over union (IOU).
A perfect match occurs when and, if both bounding boxes do not intercept each other,
The closer to 1the IOU gets, the better the detection is considered. As object detectors also perform the
classification of each bounding box, only ground-truth and detected boxes of the same class are
comparable through the IOU.
By setting an IOU threshold, a metric can be more or less restrictive on considering detections as correct or
incorrect. An IOU threshold closer to 1is more restrictive as it requires almost-perfect detections, while an
IOU threshold closer to, but different than O is more flexible, considering as detections even small overlaps
between and . OU values are usually expressed in percentages, and the most used threshold values
are and . In Section 4.1, Section 4.2, and Section 4.4 the IOU is used to define the metrics that are
https://jwww.mdpi.com/2079-9292/10/3/279 Page 7 of 26
A Comparative Analysis of Object Detection Metrics with a Companion Open-Source Toolkit | MDPI 12/7/25, 3:45 AM
most relevant to object detection.
4.1. Precision and Recall
Let us consider a detector that assumes that every possible rectangular region of the image contains a
target object (this would be done by placing bounding boxes of all possible sizes centered in every image
pixel). If there is one object to be detected, the detector would correctly find it by one of the many predicted
bounding boxes. That is not an efficient way to detect objects, as many wrong predictions are made as well.
Conversely, a detector which never generates any bounding box, will never have a miss-detection. These
extreme examples highlight two important concepts, referred as precision and recall, are further explained
below.
Precision is the ability of a model to identify only relevant objects. It is the percentage of correct positive
predictions. Recall is the ability of a model to find all relevant cases (all ground-truth bounding boxes). It is
the percentage of correct positive predictions among all given ground truths. To calculate the precision and
recall values, each detected bounding box must first be classified as:
e True positive (TP): A correct detection of a ground-truth bounding box;
e False positive (FP): An incorrect detection of a non-existing object or a misplaced detection of an
existing object;
e False negative (FN): An undetected ground-truth bounding box.
Assuming there is a dataset with G ground-truths and a model that outputs N detections, of which S are
correct ( ), the concepts of precision and recall can be formally expressed as:
4.2. Average Precision
As discussed above, the output of an object detector is characterized by a bounding box, a class, and a
confidence interval. The confidence level can be taken into account in the precision and recall calculations
by considering as positive detections only those whose confidence is larger than a confidence threshold
The detections whose confidence levelis smallerthan are considered as negatives. By doing so, one may
rewrite Equations (2) and (3) to consider this dependence on the confidence threshold as:
BothTP andFP_ aredecreasing functions of ,asalarger reduces the number of positive detections.
Conversely, FN is anincreasing function of ,since less positive detections imply a larger number of
negative detections. In addition, does notdepend on _ andis aconstant equal to the
https://jwww.mdpi.com/2079-9292/10/3/279 Page 8 of 26
A Comparative Analysis of Object Detection Metrics with a Companion Open-Source Toolkit | MDPI 12/7/25, 3:45 AM
number of all the ground truths. Therefore, from Equation (5), the recall is a decreasing function of .
On the other hand, nothing can be said a priori about the precision , since both the numerator and
denominator of Equation (4) are decreasing functions of , and indeed the graph of tends to
exhibit a zig-zag behavior in practical cases, as later illustrated in Section 5.
In practice, a good object detector should find all ground-truth objects( = high recall), while
identifying only relevant objects ( = high precision). Therefore, a particular object detector can be
considered good if, when the confidence threshold decreases, its precision remains high as its recall
increases. Hence, a large area under the curve (AUC) tends to indicate both high precision and high recall.
Unfortunately, in practical cases, the precision < recall plot is often not monotonic, being zigzag-like
instead, which poses challenges to an accurate measurement of its AUC.
The average precision (AP) is a metric based on the area under a curve that has been pre-
processed to eliminate the zig-zag behavior. It summarizes this precision-recall trade-off dictated by
confidence levels of the predicted bounding boxes.
To compute the AP, one starts by ordering the K different confidence values output by the object
detector as:
Since the — values also have a one-to-one, monotonic correspondence with , which has a one-to-one,
monotonic, correspondence with the index k, then the curve is not continuous but sampled at the
discrete points , leading to the set of pairs ( indexed by k.
Now one defines an ordered set of reference recall values ,
The AP is computed using the two ordered sets in Equations (6) and (7). But before computing AP, the
precision x recall pairs have to be interpolated such that the resulting precision x recall curve is monotonic.
The resulting interpolated curve is defined by a continuous function ,where_ is areal value
contained in the interval , defined as:
(8)
where is defined in Equation (6) and is the recall value for the confidence , computed
according to Equation (5). The precision value interpolated at recall R corresponds to the maximum
precision whose corresponding recall value is greater than or equal to R. Note that an
interpolation using a polynomial fitting would not be convenient in this case, since a polynomial
interpolation cannot guarantee that the resulting interpolated curve is monotonic.
Now one is ready to compute AP by sampling at the N reference recall values defined in
Equation (7). The AP is the area under the curve calculated by a Riemann integral of
using the K recall values from the set in Equation (7) as sampling points, that is,
(9)
where is defined in Equation (8) and is given by Equation (12), with and
There are basically two approaches to compute this Riemann integral: The N-point interpolation and the all-
point interpolation, as detailed below.
4.2.1. N-Point Interpolation
In the N-point interpolation, the set of reference recall values for the computation of the Riemann
integral in Equation (9) are equally spaced in the interval _ that is,
https://jwww.mdpi.com/2079-9292/10/3/279 Page 9 of 26
A Comparative Analysis of Object Detection Metrics with a Companion Open-Source Toolkit | MDPI 12/7/25, 3:45 AM
and thus the expression for AP becomes:
Actually the N-point interpolation as defined by Equation (11) computes an AP value which is equal to the
value computed by the Riemann integral in Equation (9) multiplied by ——.
Popular applications of this interpolation method use as in the competition [82] and as
initially adopted by the competition [24], which was later changed to the all-point interpolation method.
4.2.2. All-Point Interpolation
For the computation of AP using the so-called all-point interpolation, here referred to as ,as the set
values used to compute the Riemann integral in Equation (9) corresponds exactly to the set of recall
values computed considering all K confidence levels in Equation (6), with the confidences
and added so that the points and are considered in Equation (9).
More precisely,
(12)
where is given by Equation (5) with and
Using this definition of in Equation (12), is computed using Equation (9). In the all-point
interpolation, instead of using the precision observed at only a few points, the AP is obtained by
interpolating the precision at each recall level. The Pascal Challenge [24] adopts the all-point interpolation
method to compute the average precision.
4.3. Mean Average Precision
Regardless of the interpolation method, AP is obtained individually for each class. In large datasets with
many classes, it is useful to have a unique metric that is able to represent the exactness of the detections
among all classes. For such cases, the mean average precision (MAP) is computed, which is simply the
average AP over all classes [8,47], that is,
where is the AP value for the /-th class and C is the total number of classes being evaluated.
4.4, Average Recall
The average recall (AR) [90] is another evaluation metric used to measure the assertiveness of object
detectors for a given class. Unlike the average precision, the confidences of the estimated detections are
not taken into account in AR computation. This turns all detections into positive ones, which is equivalent to
setting the confidence threshold as in Equations (4) and (5).
The AR metric makes an evaluation at a large range of IOU thresholds, by taking into account all recall
values obtained for IOU thresholds in the interval .An lOU of 0.5 can be interpreted as a rough
localization of an object and is the least acceptable IOU by most of the metrics, and an IOU equal to 1 is
equivalent to the perfect location of the detected object. Therefore, by averaging recall values in the interval
, the model is evaluated on the condition of the object location being considerably accurate.
Let o be the IOU overlap between a ground truth and a detected bounding box as computed by Equation (1),
and a function that retrieves the recall for a given IOU o. The AR is defined as twice the area under
the curve for the IOU interval , that is,
https://jwww.mdpi.com/2079-9292/10/3/279 Page 10 of 26
A Comparative Analysis of Object Detection Metrics with a Companion Open-Source Toolkit | MDPI 12/7/25, 3:45 AM
(14)
The authors in [90] also give a straightforward equation for the computation of the above integral from the
discrete sample set, as twice the average of the excess IOU for all the ground-truths, that is,
_ (15)
where denotes the best IOU obtained for a given ground truth / and G is the total number of ground-
truths.
Interestingly, COCO also reports the AR, although its definition does not match exactly that in Equation (15).
Instead, what is reported as the COCO AR is the average of the maximum obtained recall across several
IOU thresholds. To do so one first defines a set of O lOU thresholds:
(16)
Then, letting be the precision x recall points for a confidence , given the lOU
threshold , the COCO AR is computed as:
that is, the average of the largest recall values such that the precision is greater than zero for each lOU
threshold, and as defined in Equation (6). Effectively, this yields a coarse approximation of the original
integral in Equation (14), provided that the IOU threshold set covers an adequate range of overlaps.
4.5. Mean Average Recall
As the AR is calculated individually for each class, similarly to what is done to compute mAP, a unique AR
value can be obtained considering the mean AR among all classes, that is:
In the sequel, a practical example illustrates the differences reflected in the final result depending on the
chosen method.
5. A Numerical Example
Considering the set of 12 images in Figure 3, each image, except (a), (g), and (j), has at least one target
object of the class cat, whose ground-truth locations are delimited by the green rectangles. There is a total
of 12 target objects limited by the green boxes. Images (b), (e), and (f) have each two ground-truth samples
of the target class. An object detector predicted 12 objects represented by the red rectangles (labeled with
letters ‘A’ to ‘L) with their associated confidence levels being represented as percentages also shown close
to the corresponding boxes. From the above, images (a), (g), and (j) are expected to have no detection, and
images (b), (e), and (f) are expected to have two detections each.
https://jwww.mdpi.com/2079-9292/10/3/279 Page 11 of 26
A Comparative Analysis of Object Detection Metrics with a Companion Open-Source Toolkit | MDPI 12/7/25, 3:45 AM
Figure 3. Samples of 12 images from the PASCAL VOC 2012 dataset [67] with ground-truth objects of the class
cat in green boxes, and the detections performed by [9] in red boxes along with their respected confidence levels.
In samples (b-d,f,h,i,k,) the amount of the ground-truth and detected objects is the same. In samples of images
(a,g), No ground-truth object should be detected but one false detection occurred in image (j). In sample (e) there
are two target objects to be detected, but the detector missed one of them.
All things considered, to evaluate the precision and recall of the 12 detections it is necessary to establish an
IOU threshold ¢, which will classify each detection as TP or FP. In this example, let us first consider as TP the
detections with _ that is
As stated before, AP is a metric that integrates precision and recall in different confidence values. Thus, it is
necessary to count the amount of TP and FP classifications given the different confidence levels. Table3
presents each detection from our example sorted by their confidence levels. In this table, columns > TP
and>FP = are the accumulated TPs and FPs, respectively, whose corresponding confidence levels are
larger than or equal to the confidence specified in the second column of the table. Precision ( ) and
recall ( ) values are calculated based on Equations (4) and (5), respectively. In this example a detection
is considered as a TP only if its lOU is larger than 50%, and in this case the column ‘IOU > 0.5?’ is marked as
‘Yes’, otherwise it is marked as ‘No’ and is considered an FP. In this example, all detections overlap some
ground-truth with ,except detection J’, which is not overlapping any ground-truth, so there is no
IOU to be computed in this case.
Table 3. Precision and recall values for detections in Figure 3, that contain a total of 12 ground truths, considering an
IOU threshold
Some detectors can output one detection overlapping multiple ground truths, as seen in the image from
Figure 3b with detections ‘A’ and ‘B’. As detection ‘A’ has a higher confidence than ‘B’ ( ), ‘A’ has
the preference over ‘B’ to match the ground-truth, so ‘A’ is associated with the ground truth which gives the
highest lOU. Figure 4c,d show the two possible associations that ‘A’ can have, ending up with the first one,
which presents a higher IOU. Detection ‘B’ is left with the remaining ground truth in Figur4ef.Another
similar situation where one detection could be associated with more than one ground truth is faced by
detection ‘E’ in Figure 3e. The application of the same rule results in matching detection ‘E’ with the ground
truth whose IOU is the highest, represented by the fairer cat, at the bottom of the image.
https://jwww.mdpi.com/2079-9292/10/3/279 Page 12 of 26
A Comparative Analysis of Object Detection Metrics with a Companion Open-Source Toolkit | MDPI 12/7/25, 3:45 AM
Figure 4. Particular cases showing detected bounding boxes overlapping multiple ground truths. (a) Original
image with predicted (red) and ground-truth (green) bounding boxes. (b) Bounding boxes only. (c,d) Possible
overlaps of the first ground truth. (¢) Detection ‘A’ overlapping the first ground truth with IOU=.92. (d) Detection ‘A’
overlapping the second ground truth with lOU=.20. (e,f) Possible overlaps of the second ground truth. (e)
Detection ‘B’ overlapping the first ground truth with IOU=.19. (f) Detection ‘B’ overlapping the second ground truth
with lOU=.84.
By choosing a more restrictive IOU threshold, different precision and recall values can be
obtained. Table 4 computes the precision and recall values with a more strict IOU threshold of . By
that, it is noticeable the occurrence of more FP detections and less TP detections, thus reducing both the
precision and recall values.
Table 4. Precision and recall values for detections in Figure 3, that contain a total of 12 ground truths, considering an
IOU threshold
Graphical representations of the x values presented in Table 3 and Table 4 can be seen in
Figure 5. By comparing both curves, one may note that for this example:
Figure 5. Precision x Recall points with values calculated for: (a) Results provided in Table 3. (b) Results provided
in Table 4.
With a less restrictive lOU threshold ( ), higher recall values can be obtained with the highest
precision. In other words, the detector can retrieve about of the total ground truths without any
miss detection.
Using ,_ the detector is more sensitive to different confidence values . This is explained by the
more accentuated monotonic behavior for this lOU threshold.
Regardless the lOU threshold applied, this detector can never retrieve of the ground truths (
) for any confidence value. This is due to the fact that the algorithm failed to output any
bounding box for one of the ground truths in Figure 3e.
Note that Figure 5 suggests that an IOU threshold of is less affected by different confidence levels.
https://jwww.mdpi.com/2079-9292/10/3/279 Page 13 of 26
A Comparative Analysis of Object Detection Metrics with a Companion Open-Source Toolkit | MDPI 12/7/25, 3:45 AM
The graph for the lowest IOU threshold ( ) shows that when confidence levels are high, the precision
does not vary, being equal to the maximum (1.0) for most of confidence values .However, in order to
detect more objects (increasing the recall ), it is necessary to set a lower confidence threshold ,
which reduces the precision at most by .On the other hand, considering the highest lIOU threshold (
), the detector can retrieve half of the target objects (recall= —_—_) with a precision of
As previously explained, different methods can be applied to estimate the average precision, that is, the
area under the precision * recall curve. To obtain AP using the N-point interpolation in Equation (11) with
points, the area under the curve is computed as the average of the interpolated precision
(Equation (9)) samples considering the sampling recall points R at in the set
(Equation (10)). On the other hand, to obtain AP using the all-point
interpolation approach, the area under the curve is computed by the Riemann integral in Equation (
9), sampling the recall points R at coincident with the values given by the last column of Table
3 or of Table4 (Equation (12)). The results can be seen in Figure6.When an IOU threshold was
applied, the 11-point interpolation method obtained while the all-point interpolation method
resulted in a slightly higher AP, reaching . Similarly, for an IOU threshold _ the 11-point
interpolation method obtained and the all-point interpolation obtained
Figure 6. Results for different approaches for computing the AP metric. (a) 11-point interpolation with IOU
threshold . (b) All-point interpolation with IOU threshold .(c) 11-point interpolation with lIOU threshold
. (A) All-point interpolation with IOU threshold
When a lower IOU threshold ¢ was considered ( as opposed to ), the AP was considerably
increased in both interpolation approaches. This is caused by the increase in the TP detections, due toa
lower IOU threshold.
If focus is shifted towards how well localized the detections are, irrespective of their confidence values, it is
sensible to consult the AR metrics (Equations (14)-(18)). Computing twice the average excess IOU for the
samples in this practical example as in Equation (15), yields , while computing the average max
recall across the standard COCO IOU thresholds, that is ,as in Equation (17), yields
. As the latter computation effectively does a coarser quantization of the IOU space, the two AR
figures differ slightly. The next section enlists and briefly describes which variations of the metrics based on
AP and AR are more frequently employed in the literature. In most cases they are the result of combinations
of different l|OU thresholds and interpolation methods.
6. Most Employed Metrics Based on AP and AR
As previously presented, there are different ways to evaluate the area under the precision x recall and recall
x 1OU curves. Nonetheless, besides such combinations of different IOU thresholds and interpolation points,
that are other variations that result in different metric values. Some methods limit the evaluation by object
https://jwww.mdpi.com/2079-9292/10/3/279 Page 14 of 26
A Comparative Analysis of Object Detection Metrics with a Companion Open-Source Toolkit | MDPI 12/7/25, 3:45 AM
scales and detections per image. This section overviews the distinctions behind all the metrics shown in
Table 2.
6.1. AP with 1OU Threshold
This AP metric is widely used to evaluate detections in the PASCAL VOC dataset [67]. Its official
implementation is in MATLAB and it is available in the PASCAL VOC toolkit. It measures the AP of each class
individually by computing the area under the precision x recall curve interpolating all points as presented in
Equation (9). In order to classify detections as TP or FP the IOU threshold is set to
6.2. MAP with IOU Threshold
This metric is also used by the PASCAL VOC dataset and is also available in their MATLAB toolkit. It is
calculated as the AP with lOU , but the result obtained by each class is averaged as given in Equation
(13).
6.3. AP@.5 and AP@.75
These two metrics evaluate the precision x recall curve differently than the PASCAL VOC metrics. In this
method, the interpolation is performed in recall points, as given in Equation (11). Then, the
computed results for each class are summed up and divided by the number of classes, as in Equation (13).
The only difference between AP@.5 and AP@.75 regards the applied IOU thresholds. AP@.5 uses
whereas AP@.75 applies . These metrics are commonly used to report detections performed in the
COCO dataset and are officially available in their official evaluation tool.
6.4. AP@[.5:.05:.95]
This metric expands the AP@.5 and AP@.75 metrics by computing the AP@ with 10 different IOU thresholds (
) and taking the average among all computed results.
6.5. APs, APyy, and AP;
These three metrics, also referred to as AP Across Scales, apply the AP@[.5,.05:.95] from Section 6.1 taking
into consideration the area of the ground-truth object:
@ APs only evaluates small ground-truth objects (area < pixels);
e APy only evaluates medium-sized ground-truth objects ( < area < pixels);
e AP, only evaluates large ground-truth objects (area > ).
When evaluating objects of a given size, objects of the other sizes (both ground-truth and predicted) are not
considered in the evaluation. This metric is also part of the COCO evaluation dataset.
6.6. AR;, ARio, and ARjo0
These AR variations apply Equation (14) limiting the number of detections per image, that is, they calculate
the AR given a fixed amount of detections per image, averaged over all classes and lOUs. The lOUs used to
measure the recall values are the same as in AP@[.5,.05:.95].
AR; considers up to one detection per image, while ARig and ARig9 consider at most 10 and 100 objects per
image, respectively.
6.7. ARs, ARy and AR,
Similarly to the AR variations with limited number of detections per image, these metrics evaluate
detections considering the same areas as the AP across scales. As the metrics based on AR are
implemented in the COCO official evaluation tool, they are regularly reported with the COCO dataset.
6.8. F1-Score
The F1-score is defined as the harmonic mean of the precision( )andrecall( )ofa given detector, that
is:
https://jwww.mdpi.com/2079-9292/10/3/279 Page 15 of 26
A Comparative Analysis of Object Detection Metrics with a Companion Open-Source Toolkit | MDPI 12/7/25, 3:45 AM
(19)
The F1-score is limited to the interval [O, 1], being O if precision or recall (or both) are O, and 1 when both
precision and recall are 1.
As the F1-score does not take into account different confidence values, it is only used to compare object
detectors in a fixed confidence threshold level
6.9. Other Metrics
Other less popular metrics have also been proposed to evaluate object detections. They are mainly
designed to be applied with particular datasets. The Open Images Object Detection Metric, for example, is
similar to MAP (IOU=.50), being specifically designed to consider special ground-truth annotations of the
Open Images dataset [68]. This dataset groups into a single annotation five or more objects of the same
class that somehow are occluding each other, such as a group of flowers or a group of people. This metric
simply ignores a detection if it overlaps a ground-truth box tagged as group of, whose area of intersection
between the detection and ground-truth boxes divided by the area of the detection is greater than 0.5. This
way, it does not penalize detections matching a group of very close ground-truth objects.
The localization recall-precision (LRP) error, anew metric suggested in [91], intends to consider the
accuracy of the detected bounding box localization and equitably evaluate situations where the AP is
unable to distinguish very different precision x recall curves.
6.10. Comparisons among Metrics
In practice, the COCO’s AP@[.5:.05:.95] and PASCAL mAP metrics are the most popular ones used as
benchmarks. However, as COCO’s AP@[.5:.05:.95] is affected by different lOUs, it is not possible to evaluate
the effectiveness of the detector with a more or less restrictive OU with this metric. For a more strict
evaluation with respect to the likeness of the ground truth and detection bounding boxes, the AP@.75
metric should be applied. In datasets where the objects appear to have relatively different sizes, AP metrics
concerning their areas should be employed. By that, the assertiveness of objects with similar relative sizes
can be compared. As shown in this work, the interpolation methods applied by the AP metrics try to remove
the non-monotonic behavior of the curve before calculating its AUC. In an N-point
interpolation, a greater NV leads to a better AUC approximation. Therefore, the 101-point interpolation
approach used by COCO’s AP metrics provides a better AUC approximation than the 11-point interpolation
approach. On the other hand, PASCAL VOC uses the all-point interpolation, which is an even better
approximation of the AUC. In cases where the detector is expected to detect at least a certain amount of
objects in a given image (e.g., detecting one bird in a flock of birds should be sufficient), AR metrics
regarding detections or sizes are more appropriate.
7. Evaluating Object Detection in Videos
Many works in the literature use the mAP as a metric to evaluate the performance of object detection
models in video sequences [92,93,94,95,96,97,98]. In this case, the frames are evaluated independently,
ignoring the spatio-temporal characteristics of the objects presented in the scene. The authors of [92]
categorized the ground-truth objects according to their motion speed. This is done by measuring the
average IOU score of the current frame and the nearby frames. In this context, in addition to MAP, they
also reported the mAP over the slow, medium, and fast groups, denoted as mAP(slow), mAP(medium), and
mAP(fast), respectively.
In some applications, the latency in the identification of the objects of interest plays a crucial role in how
well the overall system will perform. Detection delay, defined as the number of frames between the first
occurrence of an object in the scene and its first detection, then becomes an important measurement for
time-critical systems. The authors in [99] claim that AP is not sufficient to quantify the temporal behavior of
detectors, and propose a complementary metric, the average delay (AD), averaging the mean detection
delay over multiple false positive ratio thresholds, and over different object sizes, yielding a metric that fits
https://jwww.mdpi.com/2079-9292/10/3/279 Page 16 of 26
A Comparative Analysis of Object Detection Metrics with a Companion Open-Source Toolkit | MDPI 12/7/25, 3:45 AM
well for systems that rely on timely detections. While the cost of detection latency is significant for a
somewhat niche set of tasks, the inclusion of time information for video detection metrics can be useful to
assess system behaviors that would otherwise be elusive when only the standard, frame level AP metric is
used.
7.1. Spatio-Temporal Tube Average Precision
As discussed above, the aforementioned metrics are all used on an image or frame level. However, when
dealing with videos, one may be interested in evaluating the model performance at the whole video level. In
this work, we propose an extension of the AP metric to evaluate video object detection models that we refer
to as spatio-temporal tube AP (STT-AP). As in AP, a threshold over the IOU is also used to determine
whether the detections are correct or not. However, instead of using two types of overlaps (Spatial and
temporal), we extend the standard IOU definition to consider the spatio-temporal tubes generated by the
detection and of the ground truth. This metric, that integrates spatial and temporal localizations, is concise,
yet expressive.
Instead of considering each detection of the same object independently along the frames, the spatial
bounding boxes of the same object are concatenated along the temporal dimension, forming a spatio-
temporal tube, which is the video analogous to an image bounding box. Aspatio-temporal tube ofan
object o is the spatio-temporal region defined as the concatenation of the bounding boxes of this object
from each frame of a video, that is:
(20)
where is the bounding box of the object o in frame k of the video that is constituted of Q frames
indexed by
Using spatio-temporal tubes, the concept of lOU used in object detection in images (see Section 4) can be
naturally extended to videos. Considering a ground-truth spatio-temporal tube and a predicted spatio-
temporal tube _ , the spatio-temporal tube IOU (STT-IOU) measures the ratio of the overlapping to the
union of the “disvoclumre” ebettweeen and ,such that:
(21)
as illustrated in Figure 7.
Figure 7. Spatio-temporal tube IOU (STT-IOU).
In this way, an object is considered a TP if the STT-IOU is equal or greater than a chosen threshold. As in the
conventional AP, this metric may be as rigorous as desired. The closer to 1 it is, the more well-located the
predicted tube must be to be considered a TP.
Figur8e illustrates four different STTs. The STTs in red are detected STTs and the STTs in green are ground-
truth STTs. The STT in (1) constitutes an FP case, and the STT in (2) may be a TP case (depending on the
STT-IOU), as it intersects the corresponding ground-truths STT (3). Since there is no detection
corresponding to the ground-truth STT (4), it is an FN.
https://jwww.mdpi.com/2079-9292/10/3/279 Page 17 of 26
A Comparative Analysis of Object Detection Metrics with a Companion Open-Source Toolkit | MDPI 12/7/25, 3:45 AM
Figure 8. Illustration of STTs. The STT (1) constitutes a false positive (FP). The STT (2) may constitute true positive
(TP) (depending on the STT-IOU) as the detection STT intersects the corresponding ground-truth STT (3). The STT
(4) constitutes a false negative (FN).
Based on these definitions, the proposed STT-AP metric follows the AP: For each class, each ground-truth
tube is associated with the predicted tube of the same class that presents the highest STT-IOU scores
(since it is higher than the threshold). The ground-truth tubes not associated with a predicted tube are FNs
and the predicted tubes not associated with a ground-truth tube are FPs. Then, the spatio-temporal tube
predictions are ranked according to the predicted confidence level (from the highest to the lowest),
irrespective of correctness. Since the STT-AP evaluates the detection of an object in the video as a whole,
the confidence level assumed for a spatio-temporal tube is the average confidence of the bounding boxes
corresponding to each of its constituent frames. After that, the all-point interpolation (Section 4.2.2) is
performed allowing one to compute the proposed STT-AP. This procedure may be repeated and averaged
for all classes in the database, yielding the so-called mean STT-AP (mSTT-AP). From Equation (21) one can
readily see that the computational cost per frame of the SST-AP is similar to the one of the frame-by-frame
MAP.
8. An Open-Source Toolbox
This paper focuses on explaining and comparing the different metrics and formats currently used in object
detection, detailing the specifications and pointing out the particularities of each metric variation. The
existing tools provided by popular competitions [24,81,82,83,84,85] are not adequate to evaluate metrics
using annotations in formats that are different from their native ones. Thus, to complement the analysis of
the metrics presented here, the authors have developed and released an open-source toolkit as a reliable
source of object detection metrics for the academic community and researchers.
With more than 3100 stars and 740 forks, our previously available tool for object detection assessment
[100] has received positive feedback from the community and researchers. It has also been used as the
official tool in competition [86], adopted in 3rd-party libraries such as [101], and parts of our code have been
used by many other works such as in YoloV5 [9]. Besides the significant acceptance by the community, we
have received many requests to expand the tool in order to support new metrics and bounding box formats.
Such demands motivated us to offer more evaluation metrics, to accept more bounding box formats, and to
present a novel metric for object detection in videos.
This tool implements the same metrics used by the most popular competitions and object-detection
benchmark researches. This implementation does not require modifications of the detection model to
match complicated input formats, avoiding conversions to XML, JSON, CSV, or other file types. It supports
more than eight different kinds of annotation formats, including the ones presented in Table 1. To ensure the
accuracy of the results, the implementation strictly followed the metric definitions and the output results
were carefully validated against the ones of the official implementations.
Developed in Phython and supporting 14 object detection metrics for images, this work also incorporates
the novel spatio-temporal metric described in Section 7.1 to evaluate detected object in videos aggregating
some of the concepts applied to evaluate detections in images. From a practical point of view, the tool can
https://jwww.mdpi.com/2079-9292/10/3/279 Page 18 of 26
A Comparative Analysis of Object Detection Metrics with a Companion Open-Source Toolkit | MDPI 12/7/25, 3:45 AM
also be adapted and expanded to support new metrics and formats. The expanded project distributed with
this paper can be accessed at https://github.com/rafaelpadilla/review_object_ detection metrics [102].
9, Metrics Evaluation in a Practical Example
In this section, we use different object detection metrics to evaluate YOLOv5 model [9]. The chosen model
was trained with the COCO dataset and was applied in the training/validation PASCAL VOC 2012 dataset
[67]. Intentionally different datasets were used to train and evaluate the model to evidence the potential of
our tool to deal with different ground-truth and detected bounding-box formats. For this experiment, the
annotations of the ground-truth boxes are in PASCAL VOC format containing 20 classes of objects, while
the model was trained with COCO dataset and was able to detect objects in 80 classes, predicting
detections in text files in the YOLO format.
By using our tool, one can quickly obtain 14 different metrics without the necessity to convert files to
specific formats. As some classes of the ground-truth dataset are tagged differently by the detector (e.g.,
PASCAL VOC class tvmonitor is referred to as tv in COCO dataset), the only required work is to provide a text
file listing the names of the classes in the ground-truth format. This way the evaluation tool can recognize
that the detected object airplane should be evaluated as aeroplane.
A total of of images from the train/val PASCAL VOC 2012 dataset containing objects of 20
classes were evaluated by the YOLOV5 model to detect objects in 80 different classes. A total of
detections were detected by the model. Figure 9 compares the distribution of ground-truth and detected
objects per class. Due to the difference of classes in the training and testing datasets, many predicted
classes are not in the ground-truth set, so detections of the extra classes are ignored by the metrics.
Figure 9. Class distributions: (a) Ground-truth bounding boxes. (b) Detected bounding boxes.
The AP results for each class are presented in Table5. The highest AP values over all classes were obtained
when the AUC was measured with the 11-point interpolation method and an IOU threshold of ,
resulting in . As expected for all cases, a more rigorous IOU threshold ( ) resulted ina
smaller AP. Comparing the individual AP results among all classes, the most difficult object for all
interpolation methods was the potted pliant, having an AP not higher than for an lOU threshold of
and an AP not higher than with an IOU threshold of
Table 5. AP results obtained with different interpolation methods and IOU thresholds.
https://jwww.mdpi.com/2079-9292/10/3/279 Page 19 of 26
A Comparative Analysis of Object Detection Metrics with a Companion Open-Source Toolkit | MDPI 12/7/25, 3:45 AM
The results obtained by the variations which apply AP and AR with different sizes and quantity of objects per
image are summarized in Table 6.
Table 6. Values of AP and average recall (AR) variations for different object sizes and number of detections per image.
Even if the same interpolation technique is applied, the results may vary depending on the IOU threshold.
Similarly, different interpolations with the same IOU threshold may also lead to distinct results.
The metrics considering objects in different scales are useful to compare the assertiveness of detections in
datasets containing objects of different scales. In the COCO dataset, for instance, roughly of the
objects are considered small (area < pixels), are considered medium( <area< pixels), and
are considered large (area > pixels). This explains the vast amount of works using this dataset to
report their results.
10. Conclusions
This work analyzed the formats of bounding boxes used to represent the objects in popular datasets,
demonstrated the most common benchmark object detection metrics, and suggested a new metric for
videos, the spatio-temporal tube average precision (STT-AP), based on the concepts used to evaluate
object detection in images. The similarities and inconsistencies of each metric were examined, and our
results revealed their dissimilarities by evaluating the predictions of a pre-trained object detector ina
largely used dataset. A toolkit implementing all described metrics in a way compatible to most data-
annotation formats in use was presented and validated. Such results may facilitate direct and unified
comparisons among most algorithms being proposed in the field of object detection. For future work, we
intend to perform a regular survey update through its companion website, incorporating newly proposed
metrics and annotation formats, and extend it to the problem of object tracking.
Author Contributions
Conceptualization, all authors; methodology, all authors; software, R.P., W.L.P. and T.L.B.D.; validation, R.P.,
W.L.P. and T.L.B.D.; formal analysis, all authors; investigation, all authors; writing—original draft preparation,
R.P., W.L.P. and T.L.B.D.; writing—review and editing, S.L.N. and E.A.B.d.S.; visualization, R.P., W.L.P. and
T.L.B.D.; supervision, S.L.N. and E.A.B.d.S.; funding acquisition, S.L.N. and E.A.B.d.S. All authors have read
and agreed to the published version of the manuscript.
Funding
This study was financed in part by the Coordenagao de Aperfeigoamento de Pessoal de Nivel Superior -
Brasil (CAPES) - Finance Code 001, Conselho Nacional de Desenvolvimento Cientifico e Tecnolégico
(CNPq) and Fundagao de Amparo a Pesquisa do Estado do Rio de Janeiro (FAPERJ). Wesley L. Passos and
Eduardo A. B. da Silva are also partially funded by the Google Latin America Research Awards (LARA) 2020.
Data Availability Statement
The images used in Section 5 are part of the PASCAL VOC dataset and can be downloaded at http://host.ro
bots.ox.ac.uk/pascal/VOC/voc2012/index.html. The model presented in Section 9 was trained with the
COCO dataset, which can be downloaded at https://cocodataset.org, and tested with images from the
PASCAL VOC dataset, which can be downloaded at http://host.robots.ox.ac.uk/pascal/VOC/voc2012/index.
html. The tool presented in this work can be accessed at https://github.com/rafaelpadilla/review_object_det
ection metrics.
https://jwww.mdpi.com/2079-9292/10/3/279 Page 20 of 26
A Comparative Analysis of Object Detection Metrics with a Companion Open-Source Toolkit | MDPI 12/7/25, 3:45 AM
Acknowledgments
The authors gratefully acknowledge the support of NVIDIA Corporation with the donation of the Titan X
Pascal GPU used for this research.
Conflicts of Interest
The authors declare no conflict of interest.
References
1. Cheng, F.C.; Huang, S.C.; Ruan, S.J. Illumination-Sensitive Background Modeling Approach for Accurate Moving Object
Detection. /EEE Trans. Broadcast. 2011, 57, 794-801. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef]
Khan, F.S.; Anwer, R.M.; Van De Weijer, J.; Bagdanov, A.D.; Vanrell, M.; Lopez, A.M. Color Attributes for Object Detection.
In Proceedings of the 2012 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), Providence, RI, USA,
16-21 June 2012; pp. 3306-3313. [Google Scholar]
Ouyang, W.; Wang, X. A Discriminative Deep Model for Pedestrian Detection with Occlusion Handling. In Proceedings of
the 2012 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), Providence, RI, USA, 16-21 June 2012;
pp. 3258-3265. [Google Scholar]
Gao, T.; Packer, B.; Koller, D. A Segmentation-Aware Object Detection Model with Occlusion Handling. In Proceedings of
the 2011 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), Colorado Springs, CO, USA, 20-25 June
2011; pp. 1361-1368. [Google Scholar
Zou, Z.; Shi, Z.; Guo, Y.; Ye, J. Object Detection in 20 Years: A Survey. arXiv 2019, arXiv:1905.05055. [Google Scholar]
Krizhevsky, A.; Sutskever, |.; Hinton, G.E. ImageNet Classification with Deep Convolutional Neural Networks. In
Proceedings of the 25th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurlPS), Lake Tahoe,
NV, USA, 3-8 December 2012; pp. 1097-1105. [Google Scholar
Lecun, Y.; Bottou, L.; Bengio, Y.; Haffner, P. Gradient-Based Learning Applied to Document Recognition. Proc. /EEE 1998,
86, 2278-2324. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef]
Ren, S.; He, K.; Girshick, R.; Sun, J. Faster R-CNN: Towards Real-Time Object Detection with Region Proposal Networks.
IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 2017, 39, 1137-1149. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef
Jocher, G.; Stoken, A.; Borovec, J.; NanoCode012, C.; Changyu, L.; Laughing, H. ultralytics/yolov5: v3.0. 2020. Available
online: httos://github.com/ultralytics/yolov5 (accessed on 20 December 2020).
10. Dollar, P; Wojek, C.; Schiele, B.; Perona, P. Pedestrian Detection: An Evaluation of the State of the Art. /EEE Trans. Pattern
Anal. Mach. Intell. 2012, 34, 743-761. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef]
11. Ohn-Bar, E.; Trivedi, M.M. To Boost or Not to Boost? On the Limits of Boosted Trees for Object Detection. In Proceedings
of the 23rd International Conference on Pattern Recognition (ICPR), Cancun, Mexico, 4-8 December 2016; pp. 3350-
3355. [Google Scholar]
12. Viola, P.; Jones, M. Robust Real-Time Object Detection. Int. J. Comput. Vis. 2004, 57, 137-154. [Google Scholar] [CrossR
ef]
13. Hirano, Y.; Garcia, C.; Sukthankar, R.; Hoogs, A. Industry and Object Recognition: Applications, Applied Research and
Challenges. Towar. Categ. Level Object Recognit. 2006, 4170, 49-64. [Google Scholar
14. Wang, X. Intelligent Multi-Camera Video Surveillance: A Review. Pattern Recognit. Lett. 2013, 34, 3-19. [Google Scholar]
CrossRef]
15. Franke, K.; Srihari, S.N. Computational Forensics: An Overview. In Proceedings of the International Workshop on
Computational Forensics (IWCF), Washington, DC, USA, 7-8 August 2008; pp. 1-10. [Google Scholar]
16. Baltieri, D.; Vezzani, R.; Cucchiara, R. 3DPes: 3D People Dataset for Surveillance and Forensics. In Proceedings of the
2011 Joint ACM Workshop on Human Gesture and Behavior Understanding, ScottsdaleA,Z,USA, 28 November-1
December 2011; pp. 59-64. [Google Scholar]
17. Olabarriaga, S.D.; Smeulders, A.W. Interaction in the Segmentation of Medical Images: A Survey. Med Image Anal. 2001,
5, 127-142. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef
18. Cootes, T.F.; Taylor, C.J. Statistical Models of Appearance for Medical Image Analysis and Computer Vision. In
Proceedings of the Medical Imaging 2001: Image Processing, San Diego, CA, USA, 3 July 2001; pp. 236-248. [GoogleS
cholar
19. Ganster, H.; Pinz, P.; Rohrer, R.; Wildling, E.; Binder, M.; Kittler, H.Automated Melanoma Recognition. /EEE Trans. Med
Imaging 2001, 20, 233-239. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef
20. Janai, J.; Gliney, F.; Behl, A.; Geiger, A.Computer Vision for Autonomous Vehicles: Problems, Datasets and State of the
Art, Now Publishers: Norwell, MA, USA; Delft, The Netherlands, 2020. [Google Scholar
21. Buch, N.; Velastin, S.A.; Orwell, J. A Review of Computer Vision Techniques for the Analysis of Urban Traffic. /EEE Trans.
Intell. Transp. Syst. 2011, 12, 920-939. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef]
22. Zhao, Z.; Zheng, P.; Xu, S.; Wu, X. Object Detection With Deep Learning: A Review. /EEE Trans. Neural Networks Learn.
Syst. 2019, 30, 3212-3232. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef]
23. Padilla, R.; Netto, S.L.; da Silva, E.A.B. A Survey on Performance Metrics for Object-Detection Algorithms. In Proceedings
of the 27th International Conference on Systems, Signals and Image Processing (IWSSIP), Niteroi, Brazil, 1-3 July 2020;
pp. 237-242. [Google Scholar
24. Everingham, M.; Eslami, S.M.A.; Van Gool, L.; Williams, C.K.I.; Winn, J.; Zisserman, A. The Pascal Visual Object Classes
https://jwww.mdpi.com/2079-9292/10/3/279 Page 21 of 26
A Comparative Analysis of Object Detection Metrics with a Companion Open-Source Toolkit | MDPI 12/7/25, 3:45 AM
Challenge: A Retrospective. Int. J. Comput. Vis. 2015, 177, 98-136. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef]
25. Attneave, F.; Arnoult, M.D. The Quantitative Study of Shape and Pattern Perception. Psychol. Bull. 1956, 53, 452-471. [Go
ogle Scholar] [CrossRef] [PubMed]
26. Roberts, L.G. Machine Perception of Three-Dimensional Solids. PhD Thesis, Massachusetts Institute of Technology,
Cambridge, MA, USA, 1963. [Google Scholar]
27. Lowe, D.G.; Binford, T.O. The Recovery of Three-Dimensional Structure from Image Curves. /EEE Trans. Pattern Anal.
Mach. Intell. 1985, 7, 320-326. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [PubMed
28. Harris, C.G.; Stephens, M. A Combined Corner and Edge Detector. In Proceedings of the Alvey Vision Conference,
Manchester, UK, 31 August-2 September 1988; pp. 23.1-23.6. [Google Scholar
29. Lucas, B.D.; Kanade, T. An Iterative Image Registration Technique with an Application to Stereo Vision. In Proceedings of
the 7th International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI), Vancouver, BC, Canada, 24-28 August 1981; pp.
674-679. [Google Scholar]
30. Shi, J.; Tomasi. Good Features to Track. In Proceedings of the 1994 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR), Seattle, WA, USA, 21-23 June 1994; pp. 593-600.
31. Lowe, D.G. Distinctive Image Features from Scale-Invariant Keypoints. int. J. Comput. Vis. 2004, 60, 91-110. [Google Sch
olar] [CrossRef
32. Bay, H.; Tuytelaars, T.; Van Gool, L.SURF: Speeded Up Robust Features. In Proceedings of the 9th European Conference
on Computer Vision (ECCV), Graz, Austria, 7-13 May 2006; pp. 404-417. [Google Scholar
33. NguyenT,.; Park, E.A.; Han, J.; Park, D.C.; Min, S.Y. Object Detection Using Scale Invariant Feature Transform. In Genetic
and Evolutionary Computing; Springer: Berlin/Heidelberg, Germany, 2014; pp. 65-72. [Google Scholar]
34. Zhou, H.; Yuan, Y.; Shi, C. Object Tracking Using SIFT Features and Mean Shift. Comput. Vis. Image Underst. 2009, 773,
345-352. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef]
35. Dalal, N.; Triggs, B. Histograms of Oriented Gradients for Human Detection. In Proceedings of the 2005 IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), San Diego, CA, USA, 20-25 June 2005; pp. 886-893. [
Google Scholar]
36. Mizuno, K.; TerachiY,.; Takagi, K.; IZumi, S.; Kawaguchi, H.; Yoshimoto, M. Architectural Study of HOG Feature Extraction
Processor for Real-Time Object Detection. In Proceedings of the IEEE Workshop on Signal Processing Systems,
Quebec City, QC, Canada, 17-19 October 2012; pp. 197-202. [Google Scholar
37. Sun, Z.; Bebis, G.; Miller, R.On-Road Vehicle Detection: A Review. /EEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 2006, 28, 694-
711. [Google Scholar]
38. Szegedy, C.; Liu, W.; Jia,¥.;Sermanet, P; Reed, S.; Anguelov, D.; Erhan, D.; Vanhoucke, V.; Rabinovich, A. Going Deeper
with Convolutions. In Proceedings of the 2015 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
Boston, MA, USA, 7-12 June 2015; pp. 1-9. [Google Scholar
39. Simonyan, K.; Zisserman, A. Very Deep Convolutional Networks for Large-Scale Image Recognition. In Proceedings of
the 3rd International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), San Diego, CA, USA, 7-9 May 2015; pp. 1-14. [Goo
gle Scholar]
40. He, K.; ZhangX,.; Ren, S.; Sun, J. Deep Residual Learning for Image Recognition. In Proceedings of the 2016 IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), Las Vegas, NV, USA, 27-30 June 2016; pp. 3350-
3355. [Google Scholar]
41. Hinton, G.E.; Osindero, S.; Teh, YW. A Fast Learning Algorithm for Deep Belief Nets. Neural Comput. 2006, 18, 1527-1554.
Google Scholar] [CrossRef
42. Hinton, G.E.; Salakhutdinov, R.R. Reducing the Dimensionality of Data with Neural Networks. Science 2006, 373, 504-
507. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef]
43. Zoph, B.; Cubuk, E.D.; Ghiasi, G.; Lin, T-Y.; Shlens, J.; Le, QV. Learning Data Augmentation Strategies for Object Detection.
In Proceedings of the 16th European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), Glasgow, UK, 23-28 August 2020; pp.
566-583. [Google Scholar
44. Loey, M.; Manogaran, G.; Khalifa, N.E.M. A Deep Transfer Learning Model with Classical Data Augmentation and CGAN to
Detect COVID-19 from Chest CT Radiography Digital Images. Neural Comput. App!. 2020, 1-13. [Google Scholar] [Cross
Ref] [PubMed]
45. Gonzalez, R.E.; Munoz, R.P; Hernandez, C.A. Galaxy Detection and Identification Using Deep Learning and Data
Augmentation. Astron. Comput. 2018, 25, 103-109. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef
46. Sermanet, P.; Eigen, D.; Zhang, X.; Mathieu, M.; Fergus, R.; LeCun, Y. OverFeat: Integrated Recognition, Localization and
Detection using Convolutional Networks. In Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Learning
Representations (ICLR), Banff, AB, Canada, 14-16 April 2014; pp. 1-16. [Google Scholar]
47. Liu, W.; Anguelov, D.; Erhan, D.; Szegedy, C.; Reed, S.; Fu, C.Y.; Berg, A.C. SSD: Single Shot MultiBox Detector. In
Proceedings of the 14th European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), Amsterdam, The Netherlands, 11-14 October
2016; pp. 21-37. [Google Scholar]
48. Redmon, J.; Divvala, S.; Girshick, R.; Farhadi, A. You Only Look Once: Unified, Real-Time Object Detection. In
Proceedings of the 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), Las Vegas, NV, USA, 27-
30 June 2016; pp. 779-788. [Google Scholar
49. Redmon, J.; Farhadi, A.YOLO9OO0: Better, Faster, Stronger. In Proceedings of the 2017 IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), Honolulu, HI, USA, 21-26 July 2017; pp. 6517-6525. [Google Scholar]
50. Redmon, J.; Farhadi, A. YOLOv3: An Incremental Improvement. arXiv 2018, arXiv:1804.02767. [Google Scholar]
51. Bochkovskiy, A.; Wang, C.Y.; Liao, H.Y.M. YOLOv4: Optimal Speed and Accuracy of Object Detection. arXiv 2020,
arXiv:2004.10934. [Google Scholar
https://jwww.mdpi.com/2079-9292/10/3/279 Page 22 of 26
A Comparative Analysis of Object Detection Metrics with a Companion Open-Source Toolkit | MDPI 12/7/25, 3:45 AM
52. Girshick, R.; Donahue, J.; Darrell, T.; Malik, J. Rich Feature Hierarchies for Accurate Object Detection and Semantic
Segmentation. In Proceedings of the 2014 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
Columbus, OH, USA, 23-28 June 2014; p. 587. [Google Scholar]
53. Girshick, R. Fast R-CNN. In Proceedings of the 2015 IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), Santiago,
Chile, 7-13 December 2015; pp. 1440-1448. [Google Scholar
54. Dai, J.; LiY,¥.; He, K.; Sun, J. R-FCN: Object Detection Via Region-Based Fully Convolutional Networks. In Proceedings of
the 30th International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), Barcelona, Spain, 5-10
December 2016; pp. 379-387. [Google Scholar
55. Gu, J.; Hu, H.; Wang, L.; Wei, Y.; Dai, J. Learning Region Features for Object Detection. In Proceedings of the 15th
European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), Munich, Germany, 8-14 September 2018; pp. 392-406. [Google Sch
olar
56. Hu, H.; Gu, J.; Zhang, Z.; Dai, J.; Wei,Y.Relation Networks for Object Detection. In Proceedings of the 2018 IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), Salt Lake City, UT, USA, 18-22 June 2018; pp. 3588-
3597. [Google Scholar
57. Potap, D. An Adaptive Genetic Algorithm as a Supporting Mechanism for Microscopy Image Analysis in a Cascade of
Convolution Neural Networks. Appi. Soft Comput. J. 2020, 97, 1-11. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef
58. S, I'T.J.; Sasikala, J.; Juliet, D.S. Optimized Vessel Detection in Marine Environment Using Hybrid Adaptive Cuckoo
Search Algorithm. Comput. Electr. Eng. 2019, 78, 482-492. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef]
59. LiY,.;Wang, H.; Dang, L.M.; Nguyen, T.N.; Han, D.; Lee, A.; Jang, I.; Moon, H. A Deep Learning-based Hybrid Framework
for Object Detection and Recognition in Autonomous Driving. /EEE Access 2020, 8, 194228-194239. [Google Scholar] [
CrossRef
60. Chen, Y.; Zhou, W. Hybrid-Attention NetworfkorRGB-D Salient Object Detection. App/. Sci. 2020, 10, 5806. [Google Sch
olar] [CrossRef
61. Zhang, P,; Liu, W.; Lei, Y.; Lu, H. Hyperfusion-Net: Hyper-Densely Reflective Feature Fusion for Salient Object Detection.
Pattern Recognit. 2019, 93, 521-533. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef]
62. Litjens, G.; KooiT,.; Bejnordi, B.E.; Setio, AA.A.; Ciompi, F; Ghafoorian, M.; Van Der Laak, J.A.; Van Ginneken, B.; SAnchez,
C.I. A Survey on Deep Learning in Medical Image Analysis. Med. Image Anal. 2017, 42, 60-88. [Google Scholar] [CrossR
ef]
63. Cao, Z.; Duan, L.; Yang, G.; Yue, T.; Chen, Q.; Fu, H.; Xu,¥. Breast Tumor Detection in Ultrasound Images Using Deep
Learning. In International Workshop on Patch-Based Techniques in Medical Imaging; Springer: Cham, Switzerland, 2017;
pp. 121-128. [Google Scholar
64. Jaeger, PF; Kohl, S.A.; Bickelhaupt, S.; Isensee, F.; Kuder, T.A.; Schlemmer, H.P.; Maier-Hein, K.H. Retina U-Net:
Embarrassingly Simple Exploitation of Segmentation Supervision for Medical Object Detection. In Proceedings of the
Machine Learning for Health Workshop (ML4H), Vancouver, BC, Canada, 13-14 December 2020; pp. 171-183. [Google Sc
holar]
65. Li, Z.; Dong, M.; Wen, S.; Hu, X.; Zhou, P.; Zeng, Z. CLU-CNNs: Object detection for Medical Images. Neurocomputing
2019, 350, 53-59. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef]
66. Lin, T-Y.; Maire, M.; Belongie, S.; Hays, J.; Perona, P; Ramanan, D.; Dollar, P.; Zitnick, C.L. Microsoft COCO: Common
Objects in Context. In Proceedings of the 13th European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), Zurich, Switzerland, 6-
12 September 2014; pp. 740-755. [Google Scholar]
67. Everingham, M.; Van Gool, L.; Williams, C.K.I.; Winn, J.; Zisserman, A. The PASCAL Visual Object Classes Challenge 2012
(VOC2012) Results. Available online: hitp://www.pascal-network.org/challenges/VOC/voc2012/workshop/index.html
(accessed on 20 December 2020).
68. KuznetsovaA.,; Rom, H.; Alldrin, N.; Uijlings, J.; Krasin, |.; Pont-Tuset, J.; Kamali, S.; Popov, S.; Malloci, M.; Kolesnikov, A.;
et al. The Open Images Dataset V4: Unified Image Classification, Object Detection, and Visual Relationship Detection at
Scale. Int. J. Comput. Vis. 2020, 128, 1956-1981. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef]
69. Wada, K. labelme: Image Polygonal Annotation with Python. 2016. Available online: https://github.com/wkentaro/labelm
e (accessed on 20 December 2020).
70. Lin, T. Labellmg. 2015. Available online: httos://github.com/tzutalin/labellmg (accessed on 20 December 2020).
71. Wada, K. VoTT: Visual Object Tagging Tool. Available online: httos://github.com/Microsoft/VoTT (accessed on 20
December 2020).
72, Sekachev, B.; Manovich, N.; Zhiltsov, M.; Zhavoronkov, A.; Kalinin, D. opencv/cvat v1.1.0. 2020. Available online: http://doi.
org/10.5281/zenodo.4009388 (accessed on 20 December 2020).
73. Dutta, A.; Zisserman, A. The VIA Annotation Software for Images, Audio and Video. In Proceedings of the 27th ACM
International Conference on Multimedia, Nice, France, 21-25 October 2019; pp. 2276-2279. [Google Scholar]
74. Deng, J.; Dong, W.; Socher, R.; Li, L.J.; Li, K.; Li, FF. ImageNet: A Large-Scale Hierarchical Image Database. In
Proceedings of the 2009 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), Miami, FL, USA, 20-25
June 2009; pp. 248-255. [Google Scholar
75. Abadi, M.; Agarwal, A.; Barham, P.; Brevdo, E.; Chen, Z.; Citro, C.; Corrado, G.S.; Davis, A.; Dean, J.; Devin, M.; et al.
TensorFlow: Large-Scale Machine Learning on Heterogeneous Systems. 2015. Available online: https://www.tensorflow.
org/ (accessed on 20 December 2020).
76. Law, H.; Deng, J. Cornernet: Detecting Objects as Paired Keypoints. In Proceedings of the 15th European Conference on
Computer Vision (ECCV), Munich, Germany, 8-14 September 2018; pp. 734-750. [Google Scholar
Tf. Tan, M.; Pang, R.; Le, Q.V. EfficientDet: Scalable and Efficient Object Detection. In Proceedings of the 2020 IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), Seattle, WA, USA, 14-19 June 2020; pp. 10781-10790. [
Google Scholar]
https://jwww.mdpi.com/2079-9292/10/3/279 Page 23 of 26
A Comparative Analysis of Object Detection Metrics with a Companion Open-Source Toolkit | MDPI 12/7/25, 3:45 AM
78. Liu, S.; Huang, D. Receptive Field Block Net for Accurate and Fast Object Detection. In Proceedings of the 15th European
Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), Munich, Germany, 8-14 September 2018; pp. 385-400. [Google Scholar
79. Zhang, S.; Wen, L.; Bian, X.; Lei, Z.; Li, S.Z. Single-Shot Refinement Neural Networfokr Object Detection. In Proceedings
of the 2018 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), Salt Lake City, UT, USA, 18-22 June
2018; pp. 4203-4212. [Google Scholar]
80. Lin, T-Y.; Goyal, P.; Girshick, R.; He, K.; Dollar, PR Focal Loss for Dense Object Detection. In Proceedings of the 2017 IEEE
International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), Venice, Italy, 22-29 October 2017; pp. 2980-2988. [Google Schola
q
81. Open Images Object Detection RVC 2020 Edition. Available online: httos://www.kaggle.com/c/open-images-object-det
ection-rvc-2020 (accessed on 20 December 2020).
82. COCO Detection Challenge (Bounding Box). Available online: htips://competitions.codalab.org/competitions/20794
(accessed on 20 December 2020).
83. Datalab Cup: CNN Object Detection. Available online: httos://www.kaggle.com/c/datalabcup-cnn-object-detection
(accessed on 20 December 2020).
84. Google Al Open Images-Object Detection Track. Available online: https://www.kaggle.com/c/google-ai-open-images-o
bject-detection-track (accessed on 20 December 2020).
85. Lyft 3D Object Detection for Autonomous Vehicles. Available online: httos://www.kaggle.com/c/3d-object-detection-for
-autonomous-vehicles/ (accessed on 20 December 2020).
86. City Intelligence Hackathon. Available online: https://belvisionhack.ru (accessed on 20 December 2020).
87. Dudezyk, J.; Kawalec, A. Identification of Emitter Sources in the Aspect of Their Fractal Features. Bull. Pol. Acad. Sci.
Tech. Sci. Tech. Sci. 2013, 67, 623-628. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef
88. Rybak, t.; Dudezyk, J. A Geometrical Divide of Data Particle in Gravitational Classification of Moons and Circles Data
Sets. Entropy 2020, 22, 1088. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef] [PubMed
89. Jaccard, P. Etude Comparative de la Distribution Florale Dans Une Portion des Alpes et des Jura. Bull. Soc. Vaudoise
Des Sci. Nat. 1901, 37, 547-579. [Google Scholar]
90. Hosang, J.; Benenson, R.; Dollar, P.; Schiele, B. What Makes for Effective Detection Proposals? /EEE Trans. Pattern Anal.
Mach. Intell. 2015, 38, 814-830. [Google Scholar] [CrossRef]
91. Oksuz, K.; Can Cam, B.; Akbas, E.; Kalkan, S. Localization Recall Precision (LRP): A New Performance Metric for Object
Detection. In Proceedings of the 15th European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), Munich, Germany, 8-14
September 2018; pp. 504-519. [Google Scholar]
92. Zhu, X.; Wang, Y.; Dai, J.; Yuan, L.; Wei,Y. Flow-Guided Feature Aggregation for Video Object Detection. In Proceedings
of the 2017 IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), Venice, Italy, 22-29 October 2017; pp. 408-417. [G
oogle Scholar
93. Zhu, X.; Xiong, Y.; Dai, J.; Yuan, L.; Wei,Y.Deep Feature Flow for Video Recognition. In Proceedings of the 2017 IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), Honolulu, HI, USA, 21-26 July 2017; pp. 4141-4150. [Go
ogle Scholar]
94. Zhu, M.; Liu, M. Mobile Video Object Detection with Temporally-Aware Feature Maps. In Proceedings of the 2018 IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), Salt Lake City, UT, USA, 18-22 June 2018; pp. 5686-
5695. [Google Scholar
95. Zhang, C.; Kim, J. Modeling Long- and Short-Term Temporal Context for Video Object Detection. In Proceedings of the
26th IEEE International Conference on Image Processing (ICIP), Tapei, Taiwan, 22-25 September 2019; pp. 71-75. [Goog|
e Scholar
96. Deng, H.; Hua, Y.; Song, T.; Zhang, Z.; Xue, Z.; Ma, R.; Robertson, N.; Guan, H. Object Guided External Memory Network for
Video Object Detection. In Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), Seoul,
Korea, 27 October-2 November 2019; pp. 6678-6687. [Google Scholar]
97. Beery, S.; Wu, G.; Rathod, V.; Votel, R.; Huang, J. Context R-CNN: Long Term Temporal Context for Per-Camera Object
Detection. In Proceedings of the 2020 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), Seattle,
WA, USA, 14-19 June 2020; pp. 13072-13082. [Google Scholar
98. Chen, Y.; Cao, Y.; Wang, L. Memory Enhanced Global-Local Aggregation for Video Object Detection. In Proceedings of
the 2020 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), Seattle, WA, USA, 14-19 June 2020; pp.
10337-10346. [Google Scholar]
99. Mao, H.; Yang, X.; Dally, W.J. A Delay Metric for Video Object Detection: What Average Precision Fails to Tell. In
Proceedings of the 2019 IEEE International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), Seoul, Korea, 27 October-2
November 2019; pp. 573-582. [Google Scholar
100. Padilla, R.; Netto, S.L.; da Silva, E.A.B. Metrics for Object Detection. Available online: https:/github.com/rafaelpadilla/Obj
ect-Detection-Metrics (accessed on 20 December 2020).
101. Computer Research Institute of Montreal (CRIM). thelper Package. Available online: https://thelper.readthedocs.io/en/lat
est/thelper.optim.html (accessed on 20 December 2020).
102. Padilla, R.; Passos, W.L.; Dias, T.L.B.; Netto, S.L.; da Silva, E.A.B. Evaluation Tool for Object Detecttion Metrics. Available
online: httos://github.com/rafaelpadilla/review_ object detection metrics (accessed on 20 December 2020).
Publisher’s Note: MDPI stays neutral with regard to jurisdictional claims in published maps and institutional affiliations.
© 2021 by the authors. Licensee MDPI, Basel, Switzerland. This article is an open access article distributed under the terms
and conditions of the Creative Commons Attribution (CC BY) license (http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by/4.0/).
https://jwww.mdpi.com/2079-9292/10/3/279 Page 24 of 26
A Comparative Analysis of Object Detection Metrics with a Companion Open-Source Toolkit | MDPI 12/7/25, 3:45 AM
Article Metrics
Citations
Google Scholar
405 549
Web of Science Scopus
475 Crossref
Article Access Statistics
Journal Statistics
Multiple requests from the same IP address are counted as one view.
A New Approach for Power Losses Evaluation of Reversible Data Hiding for AMBTC Compressed
IGBT/Diode Module Images Based on Matrix and Hamming Coding
Previous Next
https://jwww.mdpi.com/2079-9292/10/3/279 Page 25 of 26