index – Engineering AI Agents
Engineering AI Agents
BOOK
Foundations
Training Deep Networks
Perception
Kinematics
State Estimation
Large Language Models
Multimodal Reasoning
Task Planning
Global Planning
Local Planning
Markov Decision Processes
Reinforcement Learning
VLA Agents
COURSES
Introduction to AI
AI for Robotics
Deep Learning for Computer Vision
DATA MINING - BEING PORTED
MEDIA
AI for Robotics
ABOUT ME
Object Detection
Introduction to Convolutional Neural Networks
CNN Layers
CNN Example Architectures
Using ConvNets with Small Datasets
Visualizing what convnets learn
Feature Extraction via Residual Networks
Introduction to Scene Understanding
Object Detection
Object Detection and Semantic Segmentation Metrics
Region-CNN (RCNN) Object Detection
Fast RCNN Object Detection
Faster RCNN Object Detection
You Only Look Once (YOLO)
Mask R-CNN Semantic Segmentation
Mask R-CNN Demo
Mask R-CNN - Inspect Training Data
Mask R-CNN - Inspect Trained Model
Mask R-CNN - Inspect Weights of a Trained Model
MaskRCNN Inference
Detectron2 Beginner’s Tutorial
On this page
Object Detection
Demo
Edit this page
View source
Report an issue
Object Detection
In the introductory section, we have seen examples of what object detection is. In this section we will treat the detection
pipeline
itself, summarized below:
Object detection pipeline
.
Work on object detection spans 20 years and is impossible to cover every algorithmic approach in this section - the interested reader can trace these developments by reading in
this
paper.
object-detection-roadmap
As expected, since 2014, deep learning has surpassed classical ML in the detection competitions - we therefore focus only on such architectures. More specifically we will be focusing on the so called
two stage
detectors that employ two key ingredients:
Region proposals.
Fully Convolutional Networks (FCNs).
Object detection, involves three main stages: the feature extraction stage, the classification stage and the detection or localization stage. In the literature the feature and classification stages are counted as one, called the classification stage and people refer to such architecture as two stage.
We also need to insert an additional requirement: to be able to detect objects in almost real time (20 frames per second) - a significant subset of what we call mission critical applications require it. Therefore will focus a specific family that is considered to be the canonical CNN architecture for detection - the family of region-based detectors.
Demo
Before we continue, you can try out
a demo
using your webcam and nothing else other than your browser.
Introduction to Scene Understanding
Object Detection and Semantic Segmentation Metrics
Edit this page
View source
Report an issue