Transformers Explained Visually (Part 3): Multi-head Attention, deep dive | Towards Data Science
Publish Al, ML & data-science insights to a global community of data
professionals.
LATEST EDITOR’S PICKS DEEP DIVES NEWSLETTER WRITE FOR TDS
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
Transformers Explained
Visually (Part 3): Multi-head
Attention, deep dive
A Gentle Guide to the inner workings of Self-Attention,
Encoder-Decoder Attention, Attention Score and
Masking, in Plain English.
Ketan Doshi
Jan 17, 2021 12 min read
>[
12/7/25, 4:10 AM
INTUITIVE TRANSFORMERS SERIES NLP
Photo by Scott Tobin on Unsplash
https://towardsdatascience.com/transformers-explained-visually-part-3-multi-head-attention-deep-dive-1c1ff1024853/ Page 1 of 18
Transformers Explained Visually (Part 3): Multi-head Attention, deep dive | Towards Data Science 12/7/25, 4:10 AM
This is the third article in my series on Transformers. We are
covering its functionality in a top-down manner. In the previous
articles, we learned what a Transformer is, its architecture, and
how it works.
In this article, we will go a step further and dive deeper into
Multi-head Attention, which is the brains of the Transformer.
Here’s a quick summary of the previous and following articles in
the series. My goal throughout will be to understand not just how
something works but why it works that way.
1. Overview of functionality (How Transformers are used, and
why they are better than RNNs. Components of the
architecture, and behavior during Training and Inference)
2. How it works (/nternal operation end-to-end. How data flows
and what computations are performed, including matrix
representations)
3. Multi-head Attention — this article (inner workings of the
Attention module throughout the Transformer)
4. Why Attention Boosts Performance (Not just what Attention
does but why it works so well. How does Attention capture the
relationships between words in a sentence)
And if you’re interested in NLP applications in general, | have
some other articles you might like.
1. Beam Search (Algorithm commonly used by Speech-to-Text
and NLP applications to enhance predictions)
2. Bleu Score (Bleu Score and Word Error Rate are two essential
metrics for NLP models)
How Attention is used in the
Transformer
As we discussed in Part 2, Attention is used in the Transformer in
three places:
e Self-attention in the Encoder —- the input sequence pays
attention to itself
e Self-attention in the Decoder - the target sequence pays
attention to itself
https://towardsdatascience.com/transformers-explained-visually-part-3-multi-head-attention-deep-dive-1c1ff1024853/ Page 2 of 18
Transformers Explained Visually (Part 3): Multi-head Attention, deep dive | Towards Data Science 12/7/25, 4:10 AM
e Encoder-Decoder-attention in the Decoder - the target
sequence pays attention to the input sequence
Output
A
(—
Transformer
4
| Encoder fan >»
| Layer Norm
/ Encoder >»
Input Target
(Image by Author)
Attention Input Parameters — Query, Key, and Value
The Attention layer takes its input in the form of three
parameters, known as the Query, Key, and Value.
All three parameters are similar in structure, with each word in
the sequence represented by a vector.
Encoder Self-Attention
The input sequence is fed to the Input Embedding and Position
Encoding, which produces an encoded representation for each
word in the input sequence that captures the meaning and
position of each word. This is fed to all three parameters, Query,
Key, and Value in the Self-Attention in the first Encoder which
then also produces an encoded representation for each word in
the input sequence, that now incorporates the attention scores
for each word as well. As this passes through all the Encoders in
the stack, each Self-Attention module also adds its own
attention scores into each word’s representation.
https://towardsdatascience.com/transformers-explained-visually-part-3-multi-head-attention-deep-dive-1c1ff1024853/ Page 3 of 18
Transformers Explained Visually (Part 3): Multi-head Attention, deep dive | Towards Data Science 12/7/25, 4:10 AM
(Image by Author)
Decoder Self-Attention
Coming to the Decoder stack, the target sequence is fed to the
Output Embedding and Position Encoding, which produces an
encoded representation for each word in the target sequence
that captures the meaning and position of each word. This is fed
to all three parameters, Query, Key, and Value in the Self-
Attention in the first Decoder which then also produces an
encoded representation for each word in the target sequence,
which now incorporates the attention scores for each word as
well.
After passing through the Layer Norm, this is fed to the Query
parameter in the Encoder-Decoder Attention in the first Decoder
Encoder-Decoder Attention
Along with that, the output of the final Encoder in the stack is
passed to the Value and Key parameters in the Encoder-Decoder
Attention.
The Encoder-Decoder Attention is therefore getting a
representation of both the target sequence (from the Decoder
Self-Attention) and a representation of the input sequence (from
the Encoder stack). It, therefore, produces a representation with
the attention scores for each target sequence word that captures
the influence of the attention scores from the input sequence as
https://towardsdatascience.com/transformers-explained-visually-part-3-multi-head-attention-deep-dive-1c1ff1024853/ Page 4 of 18
Transformers Explained Visually (Part 3): Multi-head Attention, deep dive | Towards Data Science 12/7/25, 4:10 AM
well.
As this passes through all the Decoders in the stack, each Self-
Attention and each Encoder-Decoder Attention also add their
own attention scores into each word’s representation.
Multiple Attention Heads
In the Transformer, the Attention module repeats its
computations multiple times in parallel. Each of these is called
an Attention Head. The Attention module splits its Query, Key,
and Value parameters N-ways and passes each split
independently through a separate Head. All of these similar
Attention calculations are then combined together to produce a
final Attention score. This is called Multi-head attention and gives
the Transformer greater power to encode multiple relationships
and nuances for each word.
(Image by Author)
To understand exactly how the data is processed internally, let’s
walk through the working of the Attention module while we are
training the Transformer to solve a translation problem. We'll use
one sample of our training data which consists of an input
sequence (‘You are welcome’ in English) and a target sequence
(‘De nada’ in Spanish).
https://towardsdatascience.com/transformers-explained-visually-part-3-multi-head-attention-deep-dive-1c1ff1024853/ Page 5 of 18
Transformers Explained Visually (Part 3): Multi-head Attention, deep dive | Towards Data Science 12/7/25, 4:10 AM
Attention Hyperparameters
There are three hyperparameters that determine the data
dimensions:
e Embedding Size - width of the embedding vector (we use a
width of 6 in our example). This dimension is carried forward
throughout the Transformer model and hence is sometimes
referred to by other names like ‘model size’ etc.
e Query Size (equal to Key and Value size)— the size of the
weights used by three Linear layers to produce the Query,
Key, and Value matrices respectively (we use a Query size of 3
in our example)
e Number of Attention heads (we use 2 heads in our example)
In addition, we also have the Batch size, giving us one dimension
for the number of samples.
Input Layers
The Input Embedding and Position Encoding layers produce a
matrix of shape (Number of Samples, Sequence Length,
Embedding Size) which is fed to the Query, Key, and Value of the
first Encoder in the stack.
(Image by Author)
To make it simple to visualize, we will drop the Batch dimension
in our pictures and focus on the remaining dimensions.
https://towardsdatascience.com/transformers-explained-visually-part-3-multi-head-attention-deep-dive-1c1ff1024853/ Page 6 of 18
Transformers Explained Visually (Part 3): Multi-head Attention, deep dive | Towards Data Science 12/7/25, 4:10 AM
(Image by Author)
Linear Layers
There are three separate Linear layers for the Query, Key, and
Value. Each Linear layer has its own weights. The input is passed
through these Linear layers to produce the Q, K, and V matrices.
(Image by Author)
Splitting data across Attention heads
Now the data gets split across the multiple Attention heads so
that each can process it independently.
However, the important thing to understand is that this is a
logical split only. The Query, Key, and Value are not physically
split into separate matrices, one for each Attention head. A single
data matrix is used for the Query, Key, and Value, respectively,
with logically separate sections of the matrix for each Attention
head. Similarly, there are not separate Linear layers, one for each
Attention head. All the Attention heads share the same Linear
layer but simply operate on their ‘own’ logical section of the data
matrix.
Linear layer weights are logically partitioned per head
https://towardsdatascience.com/transformers-explained-visually-part-3-multi-head-attention-deep-dive-1c1ff1024853/ Page 7 of 18
Transformers Explained Visually (Part 3): Multi-head Attention, deep dive | Towards Data Science 12/7/25, 4:10 AM
This logical split is done by partitioning the input data as well as
the Linear layer weights uniformly across the Attention heads. We
can achieve this by choosing the Query Size as below:
Query Size = Embedding Size / Number of heads
(Image by Author)
In our example, that is why the Query Size = 6/2 = 3. Even though
the layer weight (and input data) is a single matrix we can think
of it as ‘stacking together’ the separate layer weights for each
head.
(Image by Author)
The computations for all Heads can be therefore be achieved via
a single matrix operation rather than requiring N separate
operations. This makes the computations more efficient and
keeps the model simple because fewer Linear layers are required,
while still achieving the power of the independent Attention
heads.
Reshaping the Q, K, and V matrices
The Q, K, and V matrices output by the Linear layers are reshaped
to include an explicit Head dimension. Now each ‘slice’
corresponds to a matrix per head.
https://towardsdatascience.com/transformers-explained-visually-part-3-multi-head-attention-deep-dive-1c1ff1024853/ Page 8 of 18
Transformers Explained Visually (Part 3): Multi-head Attention, deep dive | Towards Data Science 12/7/25, 4:10 AM
This matrix is reshaped again by swapping the Head and
Sequence dimensions. Although the Batch dimension is not
drawn, the dimensions of Q are now (Batch, Head, Sequence,
Query size).
The Q matrix is reshaped to include a Head dimension and then reshaped again by swapping the Head and
Sequencd dimensions. (Image by Author)
In the picture below, we can see the complete process of
splitting our example Q matrix, after coming out of the Linear
layer.
The final stage is for visualization only - although the Q matrix is
a single matrix, we can think of it as a logically separate Q matrix
per head.
Q matrix split across the Attention Heads (Image by Author)
We are ready to compute the Attention Score.
Compute the Attention Score for each
head
https://towardsdatascience.com/transformers-explained-visually-part-3-multi-head-attention-deep-dive-1c1ff1024853/ Page 9 of 18
Transformers Explained Visually (Part 3): Multi-head Attention, deep dive | Towards Data Science 12/7/25, 4:10 AM
We now have the 3 matrices, Q, K, and V, split across the heads.
These are used to compute the Attention Score.
We will show the computations for a single head using just the
last two dimensions (Sequence and Query size) and skip the first
two dimensions (Batch and Head). Essentially, we can imagine
that the computations we’re looking at are getting ‘repeated’ for
each head and for each sample in the batch (although, obviously,
they are happening as a single matrix operation, and not as a
loop).
The first step is to do a matrix multiplication between Q and K.
(Image by Author)
A Mask value is now added to the result. In the Encoder Self-
attention, the mask is used to mask out the Padding values so
that they don’t participate in the Attention Score.
Different masks are applied in the Decoder Self-attention and in
the Decoder Encoder-Attention which we’ll come to a little later
in the flow.
(Image by Author)
The result is now scaled by dividing by the square root of the
Query size, and then a Softmax is applied to it.
https://towardsdatascience.com/transformers-explained-visually-part-3-multi-head-attention-deep-dive-1c1ff1024853/ Page 10 of 18
Transformers Explained Visually (Part 3): Multi-head Attention, deep dive | Towards Data Science 12/7/25, 4:10 AM
(Image by Author)
Another matrix multiplication is performed between the output
of the Softmax and the V matrix.
(Image by Author)
The complete Attention Score calculation in the Encoder Self-
attention is as below:
(Image by Author)
Merge each Head’s Attention Scores
together
We now have separate Attention Scores for each head, which
https://towardsdatascience.com/transformers-explained-visually-part-3-multi-head-attention-deep-dive-1c1ff1024853/ Page 11 of 18
Transformers Explained Visually (Part 3): Multi-head Attention, deep dive | Towards Data Science 12/7/25, 4:10 AM
need to be combined together into a single score. This Merge
operation is essentially the reverse of the Split operation.
It is done by simply reshaping the result matrix to eliminate the
Head dimension. The steps are:
e Reshape the Attention Score matrix by swapping the Head
and Sequence dimensions. In other words, the matrix shape
goes from (Batch, Head, Sequence, Query size) to (Batch,
Sequence, Head, Query size).
¢« Collapse the Head dimension by reshaping to (Batch,
Sequence, Head * Query size). This effectively concatenates
the Attention Score vectors for each head into a single
merged Attention Score.
Since Embedding size =Head * Query size, the merged Score is
(Batch, Sequence, Embedding size). In the picture below, we can
see the complete process of merging for the example Score
matrix.
(Image by Author)
End-to-end Multi-head Attention
Putting it all together, this is the end-to-end flow of the Multi-
head Attention.
https://towardsdatascience.com/transformers-explained-visually-part-3-multi-head-attention-deep-dive-1c1ff1024853/ Page 12 of 18
Transformers Explained Visually (Part 3): Multi-head Attention, deep dive | Towards Data Science 12/7/25, 4:10 AM
(Image by Author)
Multi-head split captures richer
interpretations
An Embedding vector captures the meaning of a word. In the
case of Multi-head Attention, as we have seen, the Embedding
vectors for the input (and target) sequence gets logically split
across multiple heads. What is the significance of this?
(Image by Author)
This means that separate sections of the Embedding can learn
different aspects of the meanings of each word, as it relates to
other words in the sequence. This allows the Transformer to
capture richer interpretations of the sequence.
This may not be a realistic example, but it might help to build
intuition. For instance, one section might capture the ‘gender-
ness’ (male, female, neuter) of a noun while another might
https://towardsdatascience.com/transformers-explained-visually-part-3-multi-head-attention-deep-dive-1c1ff1024853/ Page 13 of 18
Transformers Explained Visually (Part 3): Multi-head Attention, deep dive | Towards Data Science 12/7/25, 4:10 AM
capture the ‘cardinality’ (singular vs plural) of a noun. This might
be important during translation because, in many languages, the
verb that needs to be used depends on these factors.
Decoder Self-Attention and Masking
The Decoder Self-Attention works just like the Encoder Self-
Attention, except that it operates on each word of the target
sequence.
(Image by Author)
Similarly, the Masking masks out the Padding words in the target
sequence.
Decoder Encoder-Decoder Attention and
Masking
The Encoder-Decoder Attention takes its input from two sources.
Therefore, unlike the Encoder Self-Attention, which computes
the interaction between each input word with other input words,
and Decoder Self-Attention which computes the interaction
between each target word with other target words, the Encoder-
Decoder Attention computes the interaction between each target
word with each input word.
https://towardsdatascience.com/transformers-explained-visually-part-3-multi-head-attention-deep-dive-1c1ff1024853/ Page 14 of 18
Transformers Explained Visually (Part 3): Multi-head Attention, deep dive | Towards Data Science 12/7/25, 4:10 AM
(Image by Author)
Therefore each cell in the resulting Attention Score corresponds
to the interaction between one Q (ie. target sequence word) with
all other K (ie. input sequence) words and all V (ie. input
sequence) words.
Similarly, the Masking masks out the later words in the target
output, as was explained in detail in the second article of the
series.
Conclusion
Hopefully, this gives you a good sense of what the Attention
modules in the Transformer do. When put together with the end-
to-end flow of the Transformer as a whole that we went over in
the second article, we have now covered the detailed operation
of the entire Transformer architecture.
We now understand exactly what the Transformer does. But we
haven’t fully answered the question of why the Transformer’s
Attention performs the calculations that it does. Why does it use
the notions of Query, Key, and Value, and why does it perform the
matrix multiplications that we just saw?
We have a vague intuitive idea that it ‘captures the relationship
between each word with each other word’, but what exactly does
that mean? How exactly does that give the Transformer’s
Attention the capability to understand the nuances of each word
in the sequence?
https://towardsdatascience.com/transformers-explained-visually-part-3-multi-head-attention-deep-dive-1c1ff1024853/ Page 15 of 18
Transformers Explained Visually (Part 3): Multi-head Attention, deep dive | Towards Data Science 12/7/25, 4:10 AM
That is an interesting question and is the subject of the final
article of this series. Once we learn that, we will truly understand
the elegance of the Transformer architecture.
And finally, if you liked this article, you might also enjoy my other
series on Audio Deep Learning, Geolocation Machine Learning,
and Image Caption architectures.
Techniques
Leveraging Geolocation Data for Machine Learning: Essential
Techniques
Image Captions with Deep Learning: State-of-the-Art
Architectures
Let’s keep learning!
WRITTEN BY
Ketan Doshi
See all from Ketan Doshi
(arsticia intetigence ) (veep Learning )
(stachine Learning )
Share This Article (@) (x)
Towards Data Science is a community publication. Submit
your insights to reach our global audience and earn through
the TDS Author Payment Program.
« Write for TDS +)
https://towardsdatascience.com/transformers-explained-visually-part-3-multi-head-attention-deep-dive-1c1ff1024853/ Page 16 of 18
Transformers Explained Visually (Part 3): Multi-head Attention, deep dive | Towards Data Science 12/7/25, 4:10 AM
Related Articles
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE
What Do Large Language
Models “Understand”?
A deep dive on the meaning of
understanding and how it applies to
LLMs
Tarik Dzekman
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE August 21, 2024 31min read
Implementing
Convolutional Neural
Networks in TensorFlow
Step-by-step code guide to building a
Convolutional Neural Network
Shreya Rao
August 20, 2024 6 min read
ARTIFICIAL INTELLIGENCE DATA SCIENCE
How to Forecast Hands-on Time Series
Hierarchical Time Series Anomaly Detection using
Autoencoders, with Python
A beginner’s guide to forecast
reconciliation
Here’s how to use Autoencoders to
Dr. Robert Kibler detect signals with anomalies in a few
August 20, 2024 13 min read lines of...
Piero Paialunga
August 21, 2024 12 min read
DATA SCIENCE
Solving a Constrained
Project Scheduling
Problem with Quantum
Annealing
Solving the resource constrained project
scheduling problem (RCPSP) with D-
MACHINE LEARNING
Wave’s hybrid constrained quadratic
3 Al Use Cases (That Are model (CQM)
Not a Chatbot) Luis Fernando PEREZ ARMAS, Ph.D.
August 20, 2024 29 min read
Feature engineering, structuring
unstructured data, and lead scoring
Shaw Talebi
Auietiiet 91. ONOA Fmin rand
https://towardsdatascience.com/transformers-explained-visually-part-3-multi-head-attention-deep-dive-1c1ff1024853/ Page 17 of 18
Transformers Explained Visually (Part 3): Multi-head Attention, deep dive | Towards Data Science 12/7/25, 4:10 AM
FAUBYCL 41, 2VeT Foiliib roau
DATA SCIENCE
Back To Basics, Part Uno:
Linear Regression and Cost
Function
An illustrated guide on essential machine
learning concepts
Shreya Rao
February 3, 2023. 6 min read
Subscribe to Our Newsletter
Your home for data science and Al. The world’s leading WRITE FOR TDS - ABOUT - ADVERTISE -
publication for data science, data analytics, data engineering,
machine learning, and artificial intelligence professionals. PRIVACY POLICY ~ TERMS OF USE
© Insight Media Group, LLC 2025 COOKIES SETTINGS
https://towardsdatascience.com/transformers-explained-visually-part-3-multi-head-attention-deep-dive-1c1ff1024853/ Page 18 of 18