index – Engineering AI Agents
Engineering AI Agents
BOOK
Foundations
Training Deep Networks
Perception
Kinematics
State Estimation
Large Language Models
Multimodal Reasoning
Task Planning
Global Planning
Local Planning
Markov Decision Processes
Reinforcement Learning
VLA Agents
COURSES
Introduction to AI
AI for Robotics
Deep Learning for Computer Vision
DATA MINING - BEING PORTED
MEDIA
AI for Robotics
ABOUT ME
Large Language Models
Introduction to NLP Pipelines
Large Language Models
Introduction to NLP Pipelines
Text Tokenization
Word2Vec Embeddings
Word2Vec from scratch
Word2Vec Tensorflow Tutorial
Introduction to Recurrent Neural Networks (RNN)
Simple RNN
Time Series Prediction using RNNs
The Long Short-Term Memory (LSTM) Architecture
Language Models
RNN Language Models
Example of an RNN Language Model
RNN-based Neural Machine Translation
Character-level recurrent sequence-to-sequence model
The BLEU Score
Attention in RNN-based NMT
Transformers and Self-Attention
Single-head self-attention
Multi-head self-attention
Multilayer Perceptron (MLP)
Positional Embeddings
LLM Inference
On this page
Introduction to NLP Pipelines
NLP Pipelines
Edit this page
View source
Report an issue
Large Language Models
Introduction to NLP Pipelines
Introduction to NLP Pipelines
In this chapter, we will introduce the topic of processing with neural architectures language in general. This includes natural language, code etc.
Python and almost all programming languages are formal. They define a strict set of rules called a
grammar
that the programmer must follow religiously. In addition formal languages also define semantics or meaning of the program via a set of rules. So the exit code
0
after the execution of a routine has the meaning of successful termination but a
1
the opposite.
The English language on the other hand is “free wheeling” so to speak due to its ambiguity and size.
Some examples are in order:
Ambiguity
: “he met his maker”
Same context, different meaning
:
“The food in this restaurant was good, not bad at all”
“The food in this restaurant was bad, not good at all.”
Different context alltogether
:
“The bank’s profits eroded soon after the 2008 crisis”
“The river’s bank eroded after the 2008 floods”
To capture the fuzziness of language we need to define probabilistic models. In other words we will be speaking of
a probability distribution over possible meanings
of the input text.
NLP Pipelines
This paragraph is heavily borrowed from
here
.
Term
Definition
Segmentation
The first step in the pipeline is to break the text apart into separate sentences. Coding a Sentence Segmentation model can be as simple as splitting apart sentences whenever you see a punctuation mark. But modern NLP pipelines often use more complex techniques that work even when a document isn’t formatted cleanly. Take for example the sentence “London is the capital and most populous city of England and the United Kingdom.”
Tokenization
The next step in our pipeline is to break this sentence into separate words or tokens. This is called tokenization. “London”, “is”, “ the”, “capital”, “and”, “most”, “populous”, “city”, “of”, “England”, “and”, “the”, “United”, “Kingdom”, “.”
Part of Speech Tagging
The next step tags each word with a classification result of its part - whether it is a noun, a verb, an adjective and so on. We can do this by feeding each word (and some extra words around it for context) into a pre-trained part-of-speech classification model:
Lematization
This is one of the stages of
vocabulary normalization
. At this stage we are figuring out the most basic form or lemma of each word in the sentence.
Stop words identification
This is one of the stages of
vocabulary normalization
. Stop words are common words in any language that occur with a high frequency but carry much less substantive information about the meaning of a phrase.
Dependency Parsing
The next step is to figure out how all the words in our sentence relate to each other. This is called dependency parsing. The goal is to build a tree that assigns a single parent word to each word in the sentence. The root of the tree will be the main verb in the sentence. In addition to identifying the parent word of each word, we can also predict the type of relationship that exists between those parent and child. This parse tree shows us that the subject of the sentence is the noun “London” and it has a “be” relationship with “capital”. We finally know something useful — London is a capital. Dependency parsing in NLP stacks circa 2017 was heavily based on
deep learning
architectures -
demo
Named Entity Recognition (NER)
The goal of Named Entity Recognition, or NER, is to detect and label nouns with the real-world concepts that they represent. NER systems aren’t just doing a simple dictionary lookup. Instead, they are using the context of how a word appears in the sentence and a statistical model to guess which type of noun a word represents.
demo
Coreference Resolution
Coreference resolution is the task of finding all expressions that refer to the same entity in a text. It is an important step for a lot of higher level NLP tasks that involve natural language understanding such as document summarization, question answering, and information extraction. Coreference resolution is one of the most difficult steps in our pipeline to
implement
Text Tokenization
Edit this page
View source
Report an issue