Transfer Learning - Machine Learning's Next Frontier 12/7/25, 3:42 AM
Subscribe
Transfer Learning -
Machine Learning's Next
Frontier
Deep learning models excel at learning from a large number of labeled
examples, but typically do not generalize to conditions not seen during
training. This post gives an overview of transfer learning, motivates why It
warrants our application, and discusses practical applications and
methods.
Sebastian Ruder
https://www.ruder.io/transfer-learning/ Page 1 of 40
Transfer Learning - Machine Learning's Next Frontier 12/7/25, 3:42 AM
2) dN
AMT2
This post gives an overview of transfer learning and motivates why it
warrants our attention.
Table of contents:
e What is Transfer Learning?
e Why Transfer Learning Now?
e A Definition of Transfer Learning
e Transfer Learning Scenarios
e Applications of Transfer Learning
o Learning from simulations
o Adapting to new domains
https://www.ruder.io/transfer-learning/ Page 2 of 40
Transfer Learning - Machine Learning's Next Frontier 12/7/25, 3:42 AM
e Transfer Learning Methods
o Using pre-trained CNN features
o Learning domain-invariant representations
o Making representations more similar
o Confusing domains
e Related Research Areas
o Semi-supervised learning
o Using available data more effectively
o Improving models’ abilityto generalize
o Making models more robust
o Multi-task learning
o Continuous learning
o Zero-shot learning
e Conclusion
In recent years, we have become increasingly good at training deep
neural networks to learn a very accurate mapping from inputs to
outputs, whether they are images, sentences, label predictions, etc. from
large amounts of labeled data.
What our models still frightfully lack is the ability to generalize to
conditions that are different from the ones encountered during training.
https://www.ruder.io/transfer-learning/ Page 3 of 40
Transfer Learning - Machine Learning's Next Frontier 12/7/25, 3:42 AM
When is this necessary? Every time you apply your model not to a
carefully constructed dataset but to the real world. The real world is
messy and contains an infinite number of novel scenarios, many of
which your model has not encountered during training and for which it
is in turn ill-prepared to make predictions. The ability to transfer
knowledge to new conditions is generally known as transfer learning and
is what we will discuss in the rest of this post.
Over the course of this blog post, I will first contrast transfer learning
with machine learning's most pervasive and successful paradigm,
supervised learning. I will then outline reasons why transfer learning
warrants our attention. Subsequently, I will give a more technical
definition and detail different transfer learning scenarios. I will then
provide examples of applications of transfer learning before delving into
practical methods that can be used to transfer knowledge. Finally, I will
give an overview of related directions and provide an outlook into the
future.
What is Transfer Learning?
In the classic supervised learning scenario of machine learning, if we
intend to train a model for some task and domain A, we assume that we
are provided with labeled data for the same task and domain. We can see
this clearly in Figure 1, where the task and domain of the training and
https://www.ruder.io/transfer-learning/ Page 4 of 40
Transfer Learning - Machine Learning's Next Frontier 12/7/25, 3:42 AM
test data of our model A is the same. We will later define in more detail
what exactly a task and a domain are). For the moment, let us assume
that a task is the objective our model aims to perform, e.g. recognize
objects in images, and a domain is where our data is coming from, e.g.
images taken in San Francisco coffee shops.
Traditional ML
Task /domain A &.
Task / domain B
Sbe-vavbat-a-varel
evaluation on the same
task or domain.
ModelA Model B
[iN \ 7
Vw Na,
Figure 1: The traditional supervised learning setup in ML
We can now train a model A on this dataset and expect it to perform well
on unseen data of the same task and domain. On another occasion, when
given data for some other task or domain B, we require again labeled
data of the same task or domain that we can use to train a new model B
so that we can expect it to perform well on this data.
The traditional supervised learning paradigm breaks down when we do
not have sufficient labeled data for the task or domain we care about to
train a reliable model.
Tf vara varant ta train a madal ta datant noadaactriana an nicht_Hma moadaaca
https://www.ruder.io/transfer-learning/ Page 5 of 40
Transfer Learning - Machine Learning's Next Frontier 12/7/25, 3:42 AM
Al WVU WYCALIL LY LICLILI GA LIIVUel! LY ULLUEUL preMvesvt. LALO Vil ALISA LiL LLLIABUD,
we could apply a model that has been trained on a similar domain, e.g.
on day-time images. In practice, however, we often experience a
deterioration or collapse in performance as the model has inherited the
bias of its training data and does not know how to generalize to the new
domain.
If we want to train a model to perform a new task, such as detecting
bicyclists, we cannot even reuse an existing model, as the labels between
the tasks differ.
Transfer learning allows us to deal with these scenarios by leveraging the
already existing labeled data of some related task or domain. We try to
store this knowledge gained in solving the source task in the source
domain and apply it to our problem of interest as can be seen in Figure
2.
Transfer learning
Source task /
domain Target task /
domain
Storing knowledge gained solving
one problem and applying it toa
different but related problem.
Knowledge
Figure 2: The transfer learning setup
https://www.ruder.io/transfer-learning/ Page 6 of 40
Transfer Learning - Machine Learning's Next Frontier 12/7/25, 3:42 AM
In practice, we seek to transfer as much knowledge as we can from the
source setting to our target task or domain. This knowledge can take on
various forms depending on the data: it can pertain to how objects are
composed to allow us to more easily identify novel objects; it can be with
regard to the general words people use to express their opinions, etc.
Why Transfer Learning Now?
Andrew Ng, chief scientist at Baidu and professor at Stanford, said
during his widely popular NIPS 2016 tutorial that transfer learning will
be -- after supervised learning -- the next driver of ML commercial
SUCCESS.
driver of ML
success.’
Einiuira 22> Andras NIA an tranefar laarnina at NIDC 9N1A
https://www.ruder.io/transfer-learning/ Page 7 of 40
Transfer Learning - Machine Learning's Next Frontier 12/7/25, 3:42 AM
PTLJUISS Ye FALIMAITVYV ING VIE LI OIoIG! ISOC AINE Ww oui
In particular, he sketched out a chart on a whiteboard that I've sought to
replicate as faithfully as possible in Figure 4 below (sorry about the
unlabelled axes). According to Andrew Ng, transfer learning will become
a key driver of Machine Learning success 1n industry.
Drivers of ML success in industry
Supervised learning ce
. Transfer learning
Commercial
success
Unsupervised learning
- Andrew Ng, NIPS 2016 tutorial
Figure 4: Drivers of ML industrial success according to Andrew Ng
It is indisputable that ML use and success in industry has so far been
mostly driven by supervised learning. Fuelled by advances in Deep
Learning, more capable computing utilities, and large labeled datasets,
supervised learning has been largely responsible for the wave of renewed
interest in AI, funding rounds and acquisitions, and in particular the
applications of machine learning that we have seen in recent years and
that have become part of our daily lives. If we disregard naysayers and
heralds of another AI winter and instead trust the prescience of Andrew
Ng, this success will likely continue.
It is less clear, however, why transfer learning which has been around for
decades and is currently little utilized in industry, will see the explosive
https://www.ruder.io/transfer-learning/ Page 8 of 40
Transfer Learning - Machine Learning's Next Frontier 12/7/25, 3:42 AM
o we ~
growth predicted by Ng. Even more so as transfer learning currently
receives relatively little visibility compared to other areas of machine
learning such as unsupervised learning and reinforcement learning,
which have come to enjoy increasing popularity: Unsupervised learning -
- the keyingredient on the quest to General AI according to Yann LeCun
as can be seen in Figure 5 -- has seen a resurgence of interest, driven in
particular by Generative Adversarial Networks. Reinforcement learning,
in turn, spear-headed by Google DeepMind has led to advances in game-
playing AI exemplified by the success of AlphaGo and has already seen
success in the real world, e.g. by reducing Google's data center cooling
bill by40%. Both of these areas, while promising, will likely only have a
comparatively small commercial impact in the foreseeable future and
mostly remain within the confines of cutting-edge research papers as
they still face many challenges.
a Y LeCun
@ “Pure” Reinforcement Learning (cherry)
» The machine predicts a scalar
reward given once in a while.
> A few bits for some samples ___
@ Supervised Learning (icing)
» The machine predicts a category
or a few numbers for each input
» Predicting human-supplied data
> 10-10,000 bits per sample
@ Unsupervised/Predictive Learning (cake)
» The machine predicts any part of
its input for any observed part.
» Predicts future frames in videos
> Millions of bits per sample
@ (Yes, I know, this picture is slightly offensive to RL folks. But I’ll make it up)
Figure 5: Transfer Learning is conspicuously absent as ingredient from Yann LeCun's cake
https://www.ruder.io/transfer-learning/ Page 9 of 40
Transfer Learning - Machine Learning's Next Frontier 12/7/25, 3:42 AM
What makes transfer learning different? In the following, we will look at
the factors that -- In our opinion -- motivate Ng's prognosis and outline
the reasons why just now is the time to pay attention to transfer
learning.
The current use of machine learning in industry is characterised by a
dichotomy:
On the one hand, over the course of the last years, we have obtained the
ability to train more and more accurate models. We are now at the stage
that for many tasks, state-of-the-art models have reached a level where
their performance is so good that it is no longer a hindrance for users.
How good? The newest residual networks ! on ImageNet achieve
superhuman performance at recognising objects; Google's Smart Reply
[2] automatically handles 10% of all mobile responses; speech recognition
error has consistently dropped and is more accurate than typing !2!; we
can automatically identify skin cancer as well as dermatologists; Google's
NMT system |4! is used in production for more than 10 language pairs;
Baidu can generate realistic sounding speech in real-time; the list goes
on and on. This level of maturity has allowed the large-scale deployment
of these models to millions of users and has enabled widespread
adoption.
On the other hand, these successful models are immensely data-hungry
and rely on huge amounts of labeled data to achieve their performance.
For some tasks and domains, this data is available as it has been
painstakingly gathered over many years. In a few cases, it is public, e.g.
https://www.ruder.io/transfer-learning/ Page 10 of 40
Transfer Learning - Machine Learning's Next Frontier 12/7/25, 3:42 AM
ImageNet |5!, but large amounts of labeled data are usually proprietary
or expensive to obtain, as in the case of many speech or MT datasets, as
they provide an edge over the competition.
At the same time, when applying a machine learning model in the wild, it
is faced with a myriad of conditions which the model has never seen
before and does not know how to deal with; each client and every user
has their own preferences, possesses or generates data that is different
than the data used for training; a model is asked to perform many tasks
that are related to but not the same as the task it was trained for. In all of
these situations, our current state-of-the-art models, despite exhibiting
human-level or even super-human performance on the task and domain
they were trained on, suffer a significant loss in performance or even
break down completely.
Transfer learning can help us deal with these novel scenarios and is
necessary for production-scale use of machine learning that goes beyond
tasks and domains were labeled data is plentiful. So far, we have applied
our models to the tasks and domains that -- while impactful -- are the
low-hanging fruits in terms of data availability. To also serve the long tail
of the distribution, we must learn to transfer the knowledge we have
acquired to new tasks and domains.
To be able to do this, we need to understand the concepts that transfer
learning involves. For this reason, we will give a more technical
definition in the following section.
https://www.ruder.io/transfer-learning/ Page 11 of 40
Transfer Learning - Machine Learning's Next Frontier 12/7/25, 3:42 AM
A Definition of Transfer
Learning
For this definition, we will closely follow the excellent survey by Pan and
Yang (2010) !©! with binary document classification as a running
example.
Transfer learning involves the concepts of a domain and a task. A
domain D consists of a feature space ¥ and a marginal probability
distribution P(X ) over the feature space, where X = %j,---,@, € &.
For document classification with a bag-of-words representation, ¥ is the
space of all document representations, x; is the i-th term vector
corresponding to some document and X is the sample of documents
used for training.
Given a domain, D = {, P(X)}, atask 7 consists of a label space V
and a conditional probability distribution P(Y |X) that is typically
learned from the training data consisting of pairs x; © X and y; € Y. In
our document classification example, .y is the set of all labels, 1.e. True,
False and y; 1s either True or False.
Given a source domain Dg, a corresponding source task 7g, as well as a
target domain Dr and a target task 77, the objective of transfer learning
now is to enable us to learn the target conditional probability
Aictrihutian PlV.nl Vin) in De unth tha infarmatian cainad fram T)~ and
https://www.ruder.io/transfer-learning/ Page 12 of 40
Transfer Learning - Machine Learning's Next Frontier 12/7/25, 3:42 AM
ULOLLIVULIVLIL £ \+ Lo |~*i ) Xd £27J VV ALLEL CLAW LEEW LILLaLIvdidt > bettie ALbwiilL ire) CALI
Ts where Dg 4 Dr or Tg 4 Tr. In most cases, a limited number of
labeled target examples, which is exponentially smaller than the number
of labeled source examples are assumed to be available.
As both the domain D and the task 7 are defined as tuples, these
inequalities give rise to four transfer learning scenarios, which we will
discus below.
Transfer Learning Scenarios
Given source and target domains Ds and Dr where D = {¥, P(X)} and
source and target tasks 73 and 77 where 7 = {), P(Y|X)} source and
target conditions can vary in four ways, which we will illustrate in the
following again using our document classification example:
1. Xg # Xp. The feature spaces of the source and target domain
are different, e.g. the documents are written in two different
languages. In the context of natural language processing, this is
generally referred to as cross-lingual adaptation.
2. P(Xg) 4 P( Xr). The marginal probability distributions of
source and target domain are different, e.g. the documents
discuss different topics. This scenario is generally known as
domain adaptation.
https://www.ruder.io/transfer-learning/ Page 13 of 40
Transfer Learning - Machine Learning's Next Frontier 12/7/25, 3:42 AM
3. Vs # Yr. The label spaces between the two tasks are different,
e.g. documents need to be assigned different labels in the target
task. In practice, this scenario usually occurs with scenario 4, as
it is extremely rare for two different tasks to have different label
spaces, but exactly the same conditional probability
distributions.
4. P(Ys|Xs5) 4 P(Yr| Xr). The conditional probability
distributions of the source and target tasks are different, e.g.
source and target documents are unbalanced with regard to
their classes. This scenario is quite common in practice and
approaches such as over-sampling, under-sampling, or SMOTE
[7] are widely used.
After we are now aware of the concepts relevant for transfer learning and
the scenarios in which it is applied, we will look to different applications
of transfer learning that illustrate some of its potential.
Applications of Transfer
Learning
Learning from simulations
One particular application of transfer learning that I'm very excited
about and that I assume we'll see more of in the future is learning from
https://www.ruder.io/transfer-learning/ Page 14 of 40
Transfer Learning - Machine Learning's Next Frontier 12/7/25, 3:42 AM
simulations. For many machine learning applications that rely on
hardware for interaction, gathering data and training a model in the real
world is either expensive, time-consuming, or simply too dangerous. It 1s
thus advisable to gather data in some other, less risky way.
Simulation is the preferred tool for this and is used towards enabling
many advanced ML systems in the real world. Learning from a
simulation and applying the acquired knowledge to the real world is an
instance of transfer learning scenario 2, as the feature spaces between
source and target domain are the same (both generally rely on pixels),
but the marginal probability distributions between simulation and
reality are different, 1.e. objects in the simulation and the source look
different, although this difference diminishes as simulations get more
realistic. At the same time, the conditional probability distributions
between simulation and real wold might be different as the simulation is
not able to fully replicate all reactions in the real world, e.g. a physics
engine can not completely mimic the complex interactions of real-world
objects.
https://www.ruder.io/transfer-learning/ Page 15 of 40
Transfer Learning - Machine Learning's Next Frontier 12/7/25, 3:42 AM
Figure 6: A Google self-driving car (source: Google Research blog)
Learning from simulations has the benefit of making data gathering easy
as objects can be easily bounded and analyzed, while simultaneously
enabling fast training, as learning can be parallelized across multiple
instances. Consequently, it is a prerequisite for large-scale machine
learning projects that need to interact with the real world, such as self-
driving cars (Figure 6). According to Zhaoyin Jia, Google's self-driving
car tech lead, "Simulation is essential if you really want to do a self-
driving car". Udacity has open-sourced the simulator it uses for teaching
its self-driving car engineer nanodegree, which can be seen in Figure 7
and OpenAl's Universe will potentially allows to train a self-driving car
using GTA 5 or other video games.
Figure 7: Udacity's self-driving car simulator (source: TechCrunch)
Another area where learning from simulations is key is robotics:
https://www.ruder.io/transfer-learning/ Page 16 of 40
Transfer Learning - Machine Learning's Next Frontier 12/7/25, 3:42 AM
Training models on a real robot is too slow and robots are expensive to
train. Learning from a simulation and transferring the knowledge to
real-world robot alleviates this problem and has recently been garnering
additional interest !8!, An example of a data manipulation task in the real
world and in a simulation can be seen in Figure 8.
Figure 8: Robot and simulation images (Rusu et al., 2016)
Finally, another direction where simulation will be an integral part is on
the path towards general AI. Training an agent to achieve general
artificial intelligence directly in the real world is too costly and hinders
learning initially through unnecessary complexity. Rather, learning may
be more successful if it is based on a simulated environment such as
CommAlI-eny !2! that is visible in Figure 9.
Finiira O- Farahnnk Al RPacaarch'ec CammaAl-anv (NMikalayv at al 9NA1A)
https://www.ruder.io/transfer-learning/ Page 17 of 40
Transfer Learning - Machine Learning's Next Frontier 12/7/25, 3:42 AM
PLA ON IN ON A LING We ey Gow Iy
Adapting to new domains
While learning from simulations 1s a particular instance of domain
adaptation, it is worth outlining some other examples of domain
adaptation.
Domain adaptation is a common requirement in vision as often the data
where labeled information is easily accessible and the data that we
actually care about are different, whether this pertains to identifying
bikes as in Figure 10 or some other objects in the wild. Even if the
training and the the test data look the same, the training data may still
contain a bias that is imperceptible to humans but which the model will
exploit to overfit on the training data !22!,
—_
Domain 1
Domain 2
Figure 10: Different visual domains (Sun et al., 2016)
Another common domain adaptation scenario pertains to adapting to
different text types: Standard NLP tools such as part-of-speech taggers
https://www.ruder.io/transfer-learning/ Page 18 of 40
Transfer Learning - Machine Learning's Next Frontier 12/7/25, 3:42 AM
~~ -— -~ -~ ~~ we
or parsers are typically trained on news data such as the Wall Street
Journal, which has historically been used to evaluate these models.
Models trained on news data, however, have difficulty coping with more
novel text forms such as social media messages and the challenges they
present.
MB K3ArNdYE nWoer SoTne | know has ever listened to one
of your albums all the way through
vm
= maybe | couldn't be skinny and tall but I'll
settle for being the greatest artist of all
time as a consolation
oO TM
Figure 11: Different text types / genres
Even within one domain such as product reviews, people employ
different words and phrases to express the same opinion. A model
trained on one type of review should thus be able to disentangle the
general and domain-specific opinion words that people use in order not
to be confused by the shift in domain.
="! Packed with fascinating info
mi A breeze to clean up
Figure 12: Different topics
Finally, while the above challenges deal with general text or image types,
https://www.ruder.io/transfer-learning/ Page 19 of 40
Transfer Learning - Machine Learning's Next Frontier 12/7/25, 3:42 AM
problems are amplified if we look at domains that pertain to individual
or groups of users: Consider the case of automatic speech recognition
(ASR). Speech is poised to become the next big platform, with 50% of all
our searches predicted to be performed by voice by 2020. Most ASR
systems are evaluated traditionally on the Switchboard dataset, which
comprises 500 speakers. Most people with a standard accent are thus
fortunate, while immigrants, people with non-standard accents, people
with a speech impediment, or children have trouble being understood.
Now more than ever do we need systems that are able to adapt to
individual users and minorities to ensure that everyone's voice is heard.
Figure 13: Different accents
Transferring knowledge across languages
Finally, learning from one language and applying our knowledge to
another language is -- in my opinion -- another killer application of
transfer learning, which I have written about before here in the context
of cross-lingual embedding models. Reliable cross-lingual adaptation
ane AEL WAR Le AT ALe.e EAR LA enRR BLA CPR AL Renn Aen tn AF TAL ADA AALA Len
https://www.ruder.io/transfer-learning/ Page 20 of 40
Transfer Learning - Machine Learning's Next Frontier 12/7/25, 3:42 AM
LMELIOUS WOULU ALLOW US LO IOVELASS LIC Vddl ALLIOUULILS UL Id VCICU Udld WE
have in English and apply them to any language, particularly
underserved and truly low-resource languages. Given the current state-
of-the-art, this still seems utopian, but recent advances such as zero-shot
translation #4! promise rapid progress in this area.
While we have so far considered particular applications of transfer
learning, we will now look at practical methods and directions in the
literature that are used to solve some of the presented challenges.
Transfer Learning Methods
Transfer learning has a long history of research and techniques exist to
tackle each of the four transfer learning scenarios described above. The
advent of Deep Learning has led to a range of new transfer learning
approaches, some of which we will review in the following. For a survey
of earlier methods, refer to ©,
Using pre-trained CNN features
In order to motivate the most common way of transfer learning is
currently applied, we must understand what accounts for the
outstanding success of large convolutional neural networks on ImageNet
[12]
https://www.ruder.io/transfer-learning/ Page 21 of 40
Transfer Learning - Machine Learning's Next Frontier 12/7/25, 3:42 AM
Understanding convolutional neural networks
While many details of how these models work still remain a mystery, we
are by now aware that lower convolutional layers capture low-level
image features, e.g. edges (see Figure 14), while higher convolutional
layers capture more and more complex details, such as body parts, faces,
and other compositional features.
Figure 14: Example filters learned by AlexNet (Krizhevsky et al., 2012).
The final fully-connected layers are generally assumed to capture
information that is relevant for solving the respective task, e.g. AlexNet's
fully-connected layers would indicate which features are relevant to
classify an image into one of 1000 object categories.
However, while knowing that a cat has whiskers, paws, fur, etc. 1s
necessary for identifying an animal as a cat (for an example, see Figure
15), it does not help us with identifying new objects or to solve other
common vision tasks such as scene recognition, fine grained recognition,
attribute detection and image retrieval.
https://www.ruder.io/transfer-learning/ Page 22 of 40
Transfer Learning - Machine Learning's Next Frontier 12/7/25, 3:42 AM
Figure 15: This post's token cat
What can help us, however, are representations that capture general
information of how an image is composed and what combinations of
edges and shapes it contains. This information is contained in one of the
final convolutional layers or early fully-connected layers in large
convolutional neural networks trained on ImageNet as we have
described above.
For a new task, we can thus simply use the off-the-shelf features of a
state-of-the-art CNN pre-trained on ImageNet and train a new model on
these extracted features. In practice, we either keep the pre-trained
parameters fixed or tune them with a small learning rate in order to
ensure that we do not unlearn the previously acquired knowledge. This
simple approach has been shown to achieve astounding results on an
array of vision tasks 143! as well as tasks that rely on visual input such as
image captioning. A model trained on ImageNet seems to capture details
anen ee a, i : Ci Sn Se Sc cc: Sa: [in [i i) Onn Rita
https://www.ruder.io/transfer-learning/ Page 23 of 40
Transfer Learning - Machine Learning's Next Frontier 12/7/25, 3:42 AM
dadDOUL LOC Way alllindis dlld ODJC€Cts dC SLEUCLULCA alld COMIPOsed Lal Is
generally relevant when dealing with images. As such, the ImageNet task
seems to be a good proxy for general computer vision problems, as the
same knowledge that is required to excel in it is also relevant for many
other tasks.
Learning the underlying structure of images
A similar assumption is used to motivate generative models: When
training generative models, we assume that the ability to generate
realistic Images requires an understanding of the underlying structure of
images, which in turn can be applied to many other tasks. This
assumption itself relies on the premise that all images lie on a low-
dimensional manifold, i.e. that there is some underlying structure to
images that can be extracted by a model. Recent advances in generating
photorealistic images with Generative Adversarial Networks !44! indicate
that such a structure might indeed exist, as evidenced by the model's
ability to show realistic transitions between points in the bedroom image
space in Figure 16.
https://www.ruder.io/transfer-learning/ Page 24 of 40
Transfer Learning - Machine Learning's Next Frontier 12/7/25, 3:42 AM
Figure 16: Walking along the bedroom image manifold
Are pre-trained features useful beyond vision?
Off-the-shelf CNN features have seen unparalleled results in vision, but
the question remains if this success can be replicated in other disciplines
using other types of data, such as languages. Currently, there are no off-
the-shelf features that achieve results for natural language processing
that are as astounding as their vision equivalent. Why is that? Do such
features exist at all or -- if not -- why is vision more conducive to this
form of transfer than language?
The output of lower-level tasks such as part-of-speech tagging or
chunking can be likened as off-the-shelf features, but these do not
capture more fine-grained rules of language use beyond syntax and are
not helpful for all tasks. As we have seen, the existence of generalizable
off-the-shelf features seems to be intertwined with the existence of a task
that can be seen as a prototype for many tasks in the field. In vision,
object recognition occupies sucha role. In language, the closest analogue
might be language modelling: In order to predict the next word or
sentence given a sequence of words, a model needs to possess knowledge
of how language is structured, needs to understand what words likely are
related to and likely follow each other, needs to model long-term
dependencies, etc.
While state-of-the-art language models increasingly approach human
https://www.ruder.io/transfer-learning/ Page 25 of 40
Transfer Learning - Machine Learning's Next Frontier 12/7/25, 3:42 AM
levels 45! their features are only of limited use. At the same time,
advances in language modelling have led to positive results for other
tasks: Pre-training a model with a language model objective improves
performance £!_ In addition, word embeddings pre-trained on a large
unlabelled corpus with an approximated language modelling objective
have become pervasive !27!, While they are not as effective as off-the-
shelf features in vision, they still provide sizeable gains 48! and can be
seen a simple form of transfer of general domain knowledge derived
from a large unlabelled corpus.
While a general proxy task seems currently out of reach in natural
language processing, auxiliary tasks can take the form of local proxies.
Whether through multi-task objectives #2! or synthetic task objectives
[20] [21] they can be used to inject additional relevant knowledge into the
model.
Using pre-trained features is currently the most straightforward and
most commonly used way to perform transfer learning. However, it is by
far not the only one.
Learning domain-invariant representations
Pre-trained features are in practice mostly used for adaptation scenario 3
where we want to adapt to a new task. For the other scenarios, another
way to transfer knowledge enabled by Deep Learning is to learn
representations that do not change based on our domain. This approach
https://www.ruder.io/transfer-learning/ Page 26 of 40
Transfer Learning - Machine Learning's Next Frontier 12/7/25, 3:42 AM
1s conceptually very similar to the way we have been thinking about
using pre-trained CNN features: Both encode general knowledge about
our domain. However, creating representations that do not change based
on the domain is a lot less expensive and more feasible for non-vision
tasks than generating representations that are useful for all tasks.
ImageNet has taken years and thousands of hours to create, while we
typically only need unlabelled data of each domain for creating domain-
invariant representations. These representations are generally learned
using stacked denoising autoencoders and have seen success in natural
language processing !22!, !23] as well as in vision /241,
Making representations more similar
In order to improve the transferability of the learned representations
from the source to the target domain, we would like the representations
between the two domains to be as similar as possible so that the model
does not take into account domain-specific characteristics that may
hinder transfer but the commonalities between the domains.
Rather than just letting our autoencoder learn some representation, we
can thus actively encourage the representations of both domains to be
more similar to each other. We can apply this as a pre-processing step
directly to the representations of our data !25!, !26! and can then use the
new representations for training. We can also encourage the
representations of the domains in our model to be more similar to each
https://www.ruder.io/transfer-learning/ Page 27 of 40
Transfer Learning - Machine Learning's Next Frontier 12/7/25, 3:42 AM
Confusing domains
Another way to ensure similarity between the representations of both
domains that has recently become more popular is to add another
objective to an existing model that encourages it to confuse the two
domains !29!, |39!, This domain confusion loss is a regular classification
loss where the model tries to predict the domain of the input example.
The difference to a regular loss, however, is that gradients that flow from
the loss to the rest of the network are reversed, as can be seen in Figure
17.
bsbowsYE OLy
00,
» E: ass label y
E\D
=\ ate o>y pred ictor Gy (+3 Oy)
AF domain ClassifierGals 64)
c feature extracothor Gr(-3 Of) |n s5e% les
v 2 > ® domain label d
forwardprop _ backprop (and produced derivatives) O04
Figure 17: Confusing domains with a gradient reversal layer (Ganin and Lempitsky, 2015)
Instead of learning to minimize the error of the domain classification
loss, the gradient reversal layer causes the model to maximize the error.
In practice, this means that the model learns representations that allow
it to minimize its original objective, while not allowing it to differentiate
between the two domains, which 1s beneficial for knowledge transfer.
While a model trained only with the regular objective is shown in Figure
18 to be clearly able to separate domains based on its learned
https://www.ruder.io/transfer-learning/ Page 28 of 40
Transfer Learning - Machine Learning's Next Frontier 12/7/25, 3:42 AM
4 a
representation, a model whose objective has been augmented with the
domain confusion term 1s unable to do so.
CaffeNet fc7 Domain confusion fc7
TM) source
Ml target |!
0 j
—3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3
Domain classifier score Domain classifier score
Figure 18: Domain classifier score of a regular and a domain confusion model (Tzeng et al, 2015)
Related Research Areas
While this post is about transfer learning, transfer learning is by far not
the only area of machine learning that seeks to leverage limited amounts
of data, use learned knowledge for new endeavours, and enable models
to generalize better to new settings. In the following, we will thus
introduce other directions that are related or complementary to the goals
of transfer learning.
Semi-supervised learning
Transfer learning seeks to leverage unlabelled data in the target task or
domain to the most effect. This is also the maxim of semi-supervised
https://www.ruder.io/transfer-learning/ Page 29 of 40
Transfer Learning - Machine Learning's Next Frontier 12/7/25, 3:42 AM
learning, which follows the classical machine learning setup but assumes
only a limited amount of labeled samples for training. Insofar, semi-
supervised domain adaptation is essentially semi-supervised learning
under domain shift. Many lessons and insights from semi-supervised
learning are thus equally applicable and relevant for transfer learning.
Refer to !34! for a great survey on semi-supervised learning.
Using available data more effectively
Another direction that is related to transfer learning and semi-
supervised learning is to enable models to work better with limited
amounts of data.
This can be done in several ways: One can leverage unsupervised or
semi-supervised learning to extract information from unlabelled data
thereby reducing the reliance on labelled samples; one can give the
model access to other features inherent in the data while reducing its
tendency to overfit via regularization; finally, one can leverage data that
so far remains neglected or rests in non-obvious places.
Such fortuitous data !32! may be created as a side effect of user-generated
content, such as hyperlinks that can be used to improve named entity
and part-of-speech taggers; it may come as a by-product of annotation,
e.g. annotator disagreement that may improve tagging or parsing; or it
may be derived from user behaviour such as eye tracking or keystroke
dynamics, which can inform NLP tasks. While such data has only been
https://www.ruder.io/transfer-learning/ Page 30 of 40
Transfer Learning - Machine Learning's Next Frontier 12/7/25, 3:42 AM
exploited in limited ways, such examples encourage us to look for data in
unexpected places and to investigate new ways of retrieving data.
Improving models’ ability to generalize
Related to this is also the direction of making models generalize better.
In order to achieve this, we must first better understand the behaviour
and intricacies of large neural networks and investigate why and how
they generalize. Recent work has taken promising steps towards this end
[33] but many questions are still left unanswered.
Making models more robust
While improving our models’ generalization ability goes a long way, we
might generalize well to similar instances but still fail catastrophically on
unexpected or atypical inputs. Therefore, a key complementary objective
is to make our models more robust. This direction has seen increasing
interest recently fuelled by advances in adversarial learning and recent
approaches have investigated many ways of how models can be made
more robust to worst-case or adversarial examples in different settings
[34] [35]
Multi-task learning
In transfer learning, we mainly care about doing well on our target task
or domain. In multi-task learning, in contrast, the objective is to do well
https://www.ruder.io/transfer-learning/ Page 31 of 40
Transfer Learning - Machine Learning's Next Frontier 12/7/25, 3:42 AM
on all available tasks. Alternatively, we can also use the knowledge
acquired by learning from related tasks to do well on a target. Crucially,
in contrast to transfer learning, some labeled data is usually assumed for
each task. In addition, models are trained jointly on source and target
task data, which is not the case for all transfer learning scenarios.
However, even if target data is not available during training, insights
about tasks that are beneficial for multi-task learning 44! can still
inform transfer learning decisions.
For a more thorough overview of multi-task learning, particularly as
applied to deep neural networks, have a look at my other blog post here.
Continuous learning
While multi-task learning allows us to retain the knowledge across many
tasks without suffering a performance penalty on our source tasks, this 1s
only possible if all tasks are present at training time. For each new task,
we would generally need to retrain our model on all tasks again.
In the real world, however, we would like an agent to be able to deal with
tasks that gradually become more complex by leveraging its past
experience. To this end, we need to enable a model to learn continuously
without forgetting. This area of machine learning 1s known as learning to
learn !3°!, meta-learning, life-long learning, or continuous learning. It
has seen some recent developments in the context of RL !82!, [38] [391
most notably by Google DeepMind on their quest towards general
https://www.ruder.io/transfer-learning/ Page 32 of 40
Transfer Learning - Machine Learning's Next Frontier 12/7/25, 3:42 AM
4 4 ad py py ad
learning agents and is also being applied to sequence-to-sequence
models |421,
Zero-shot learning
Finally, if we take transfer learning to the extreme and aim to learn from
only a few, one or even zero instances of a class, we arrive at few-shot,
one-shot, and zero-shot learning respectively. Enabling models to
perform one-shot and zero-shot learning is admittedly among the
hardest problems in machine learning. At the same time, it is something
that comes naturally to us humans: Toddlers only need to be told once
what a dog is in order to be able to identify any other dog, while adults
can understand the essence of an object just by reading about it in
context, without ever having encountered it before.
Recent advances in one-shot learning have leveraged the insight that
models need to be trained explicitly to perform one-shot learning in
order to achieve good performance at test time !44/, /42!' while the more
realistic generalized zero-shot learning setting where training classes are
present at test time has garnered attention lately 431,
Conclusion
https://www.ruder.io/transfer-learning/ Page 33 of 40
Transfer Learning - Machine Learning's Next Frontier 12/7/25, 3:42 AM
In summary, there are many exciting research directions that transfer
learning offers and -- in particular -- many applications that are in need
of models that can transfer knowledge to new tasks and adapt to new
domains. I hope that I was able to provide you with an overview of
transfer learning in this blog post and was able to pique your interest.
Some of the statements in this blog post are deliberately phrased slightly
controversial. Let me know your thoughts about any contentious issues
and any errors that I undoubtedly made in writing this post in the
comments below.
Note: Title image is credited to !441,
Citation
For attribution in academic contexts or books, please cite this work as:
BibTeX citation:
https://www.ruder.io/transfer-learning/ Page 34 of 40
Transfer Learning - Machine Learning's Next Frontier 12/7/25, 3:42 AM
1. Szegedy, C., loffe, S., Vanhoucke, V., & Alemi, A. (2016). Inception-v4, Inception-
ResNet and the Impact of Residual Connections on Learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1602.07261. ©
2. Kannan, A., Kurach, K., Ravi, S., Kaufmann, T., Tomkins, A., Miklos, B., ... Ramavaijala, V.
(2016). Smart Reply: Automated Response Suggestion for Email. In KDD 2016.
http://doi.org/10.475/123 ©
3. Ruan, S., Wobbrock, J. O., Liou, K., Ng, A., & Landay, J. (2016). Speech Is 3x Faster
than Typing for English and Mandarin Text Entry on Mobile Devices. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1608.07323. ©
4. Wu, Y., Schuster, M., Chen, Z., Le, Q. V, Norouzi, M., Macherey, W., ... Dean, J. (2016).
Google’s Neural Machine Translation System: Bridging the Gap between Human and
Machine Translation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1609.08144, ©
5. Deng, J., Dong, W., Socher, R., Li, L., Li, K., & Fei-fei, L. (2009). ImageNet : A Large-
Scale Hierarchical Image Database. In IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition. ©
6. Pan, S. J., & Yang, Q. (2010). A survey on transfer learning. IEEE Transactions on
Knowledge and Data Engineering, 22(10), 1345-1359. © ©
7. Chawla, N. V, Bowyer, K. W., Hall, L. O., & Kegelmeyer, W. P. (2002). SMOTE : Synthetic
Minority Over-sampling Technique. Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research, 16, 321-
357, ©
8. Rusu, A. A., Vecerik, M., Rothorl, T., Heess, N., Pascanu, R., & Hadsell, R. (2016). Sim-
to-Real Robot Learning from Pixels with Progressive Nets. arXiv Preprint
arXiv:1610.04286. Retrieved from http://arxiv.org/abs/1610.04286 ©
9. Mikolov, T., Joulin, A., & Baroni, M. (2015). A Roadmap towards Machine Intelligence.
arXiv Preprint arXiv:1511.08130. Retrieved from http://arxiv.org/abs/1511.08130 ©
10. Torralba, A., & Efros, A. A. (2011). Unbiased Look at Dataset Bias. In 2011 IEEE
https://www.ruder.io/transfer-learning/ Page 35 of 40
Transfer Learning - Machine Learning's Next Frontier 12/7/25, 3:42 AM
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR). ©
11. Johnson, M., Schuster, M., Le, Q. V, Krikun, M., Wu, Y., Chen, Z., ... Dean, J. (2016).
Google’s Multilingual Neural Machine Translation System: Enabling Zero-Shot
Translation. arXiv Preprint arXiv:1611.0455. ©
12. Krizhevsky, A., Sutskever, I., & Hinton, G. E. (2012). ImageNet Classification with Deep
Convolutional Neural Networks. Advances In Neural Information Processing Systems,
1-9, e
13. Razavian, A. S., Azizpour, H., Sullivan, J., & Carlsson, S. (2014). CNN features off-the-
shelf: An astounding baseline for recognition. IEEE Computer Society Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops, 512-519. ©
14. Radford, A., Metz, L., & Chintala, S. (2016). Unsupervised Representation Learning with
Deep Convolutional Generative Adversarial Networks. ICLR. Retrieved from
http://arxiv.org/abs/1511.06434 ©
15. Jozefowicz, R., Vinyals, O., Schuster, M., Shazeer, N., & Wu, Y. (2016). Exploring the
Limits of Language Modeling. arXiv Preprint arXiv:1602.02410. Retrieved from
http://arxiv.org/abs/1602.02410 ©
16. Ramachandran, P., Liu, P. J., & Le, Q. V. (2016). Unsupervised Pretrainig for Sequence
to Sequence Learning. arXiv Preprint arXiv:1611.02683. ©
17. Mikolov, T., Chen, K., Corrado, G., & Dean, J. (2013). Distributed Representations of
Words and Phrases and their Compositionality. NIPS. ©
18. Kim, Y. (2014). Convolutional Neural Networks for Sentence Classification. Proceedings
of the Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, 1746-1751.
Retrieved from http://arxiv.org/abs/1408.5882 ©
19. Bingel, J., & Segaard, A. (2017). Identifying beneficial task relations for multi-task
learning in deep neural networks. In EACL. Retrieved from
http://arxiv.org/abs/1702.08303 © ©
20. Plank, B., Sogaard, A., & Goldberg, Y. (2016). Multilingual Part-of-Speech Tagging with
Bidirectional Long Short-Term Memory Models and Auxiliary Loss. In Proceedings of
the 54th Annual Meeting of the Association for Computational Linguistics. ©
21. Yu, J., & Jiang, J. (2016). Learning Sentence Embeddings with Auxiliary Tasks for
https://www.ruder.io/transfer-learning/ Page 36 of 40
Transfer Learning - Machine Learning's Next Frontier 12/7/25, 3:42 AM
Lross-Lomain Sentument Vlassitication. Froceeaings oT tne ZU1o ContTerence on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing (EMNLP2016), 236-246. Retrieved
from http://www.aclweb.org/anthology/D/D16/D16-1023.pdf ©
22. Glorot, X., Bordes, A., & Bengio, Y. (2011). Domain Adaptation for Large-Scale
Sentiment Classification: A Deep Learning Approach. Proceedings of the 28th
International Conference on Machine Learning, 513-520. Retrieved from
http://www.icml-2011.0rg/papers/342_icmlipaper.pdf ©
23. Chen, M., Xu, Z., Weinberger, K. Q., & Sha, F. (2012). Marginalized Denoising
Autoencoders for Domain Adaptation. Proceedings of the 29th International
Conference on Machine Learning (ICML-12), 767--774. http://doi.org/10.1007/s11222-
007-9033-Z ©
24. Zhuang, F., Cheng, X., Luo, P., Pan, S. J., & He, Q. (2015). Supervised Representation
Learning: Transfer Learning with Deep Autoencoders. IJCAI International Joint
Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 4119-4125. ©
25. Daumé Ill, H. (2007). Frustratingly Easy Domain Adaptation. Association for
Computational Linguistic (ACL), (June), 256-263. http://doi.org/10.1.1.110.2062 ©
26. Sun, B., Feng, J., & Saenko, K. (2016). Return of Frustratingly Easy Domain Adaptation.
In Proceedings of the Thirtieth AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence (AAAI-16).
Retrieved from http://arxiv.org/abs/1511.05547 ©
27. Bousmalis, K., Trigeorgis, G., Silberman, N., Krishnan, D., & Erhan, D. (2016). Domain
Separation Networks. NIPS. ©
28. Tzeng, E., Hoffman, J., Zhang, N., Saenko, K., & Darrell, T. (2014). Deep Domain
Confusion: Maximizing for Domain Invariance. CoRR. Retrieved from
https://arxiv.org/pdt/1412.3474.pdf ©
29. Ganin, Y., & Lempitsky, V. (2015). Unsupervised Domain Adaptation by
Backpropagation. In Proceedings of the 32nd International Conference on Machine
Learning. (Vol. 37). ©
30. Ganin, Y., Ustinova, E., Ajakan, H., Germain, P., Larochelle, H., Laviolette, F., ...
Lempitsky, V. (2016). Domain-Adversarial Training of Neural Networks. Journal of
Machine Learning Research, 17, 1-35. http://www.jmlr.org/papers/volume17/15-
239/source/15-239.pdf ©
31. Zhu, X. (2005). Semi-Supervised Learning Literature Survey. @
https://www.ruder.io/transfer-learning/ Page 37 of 40
Transfer Learning - Machine Learning's Next Frontier 12/7/25, 3:42 AM
32. Plank, B. (2016). What to do about non-standard (or non-canonical) language in NLP.
KONVENS 2016. Retrieved from https://arxiv.org/pdf/1608.07836.pdf ©
33. Zhang, C., Bengio, S., Hardt, M., Recht, B., & Vinyals, O. (2017). Understanding deep
learning requires rethinking generalization. ICLR 2017. ©
34. Kurakin, A., Goodfellow, I., & Bengio, S. (2017). Adversarial examples in the physical
world. In ICLR 2017. Retrieved from http://arxiv.org/abs/1607.02533 ©
35. Huang, S., Papernot, N., Goodfellow, |., Duan, Y., & Abbeel, P. (2017). Adversarial
Attacks on Neural Network Policies. In Workshop Track - ICLR 2017. ©
36. Thrun, S., & Pratt, L. (1998). Learning to learn. Springer Science & Business Media. ©
37. Kirkpatrick, J., Pascanu, R., Rabinowitz, N., Veness, J., Desjardins, G., Rusu, A. A., ...
Hadsell, R. (2017). Overcoming catastrophic forgetting in neural networks. PNAS. ©
38. Rusu, A. A., Rabinowitz, N. C., Desjardins, G., Soyer, H., Kirkpatrick, J., Kavukcuoglu, K.,
... Deepmind, G. (2016). Progressive Neural Networks. arXiv preprint arXiv:1606.04671.
yu)
39. Fernando, C., Banarse, D., Blundell, C., Zwols, Y., Ha, D., Rusu, A. A., ... Wierstra, D.
(2017). PathNet: Evolution Channels Gradient Descent in Super Neural Networks. In
arXiv preprint arXiv:1701.08734. ©
40. Kaiser, £., Nachum, O., Roy, A., & Bengio, S. (2017). Learning to Remember Rare
Events. In ICLR 2017. ©
41. Vinyals, O., Blundell, C., Lillicrap, T., Kavukcuoglu, K., & Wierstra, D. (2016). Matching
Networks for One Shot Learning. NIPS 2016. Retrieved from
http://arxiv.org/abs/1606.04080 ©
42. Ravi, S., & Larochelle, H. (2017). Optimization as a Model for Few-Shot Learning. In
ICLR 2017. ©
43. Xian, Y., Schiele, B., Akata, Z., Campus, S. I., & Machine, A. (2017). Zero-Shot Learning
- The Good, the Bad and the Ugly. In CVPR 2017. ©
44. Tzeng, E., Hoffman, J., Saenko, K., & Darrell, T. (2017). Adversarial Discriminative
Domain Adaptation. ©
https://www.ruder.io/transfer-learning/ Page 38 of 40
Transfer Learning - Machine Learning's Next Frontier 12/7/25, 3:42 AM
The Evolving Command R+ True Zero-shot
Landscape of This post discusses MT
LLM Evaluation Command R and...
This post discusses
This post explores recent results on...
problems contributing t...
https://www.ruder.io/transfer-learning/ Page 39 of 40
Transfer Learning - Machine Learning's Next Frontier 12/7/25, 3:42 AM
https://www.ruder.io/transfer-learning/ Page 40 of 40