Mask R-CNN Semantic Segmentation – Engineering AI Agents
Engineering AI Agents
BOOK
Foundations
Training Deep Networks
Perception
Kinematics
State Estimation
Large Language Models
Multimodal Reasoning
Task Planning
Global Planning
Local Planning
Markov Decision Processes
Reinforcement Learning
VLA Agents
COURSES
Introduction to AI
AI for Robotics
Deep Learning for Computer Vision
DATA MINING - BEING PORTED
MEDIA
AI for Robotics
ABOUT ME
Mask R-CNN Semantic Segmentation
Introduction to Convolutional Neural Networks
CNN Layers
CNN Example Architectures
Using ConvNets with Small Datasets
Visualizing what convnets learn
Feature Extraction via Residual Networks
Introduction to Scene Understanding
Object Detection
Object Detection and Semantic Segmentation Metrics
Region-CNN (RCNN) Object Detection
Fast RCNN Object Detection
Faster RCNN Object Detection
You Only Look Once (YOLO)
Mask R-CNN Semantic Segmentation
Mask R-CNN Demo
Mask R-CNN - Inspect Training Data
Mask R-CNN - Inspect Trained Model
Mask R-CNN - Inspect Weights of a Trained Model
MaskRCNN Inference
Detectron2 Beginner’s Tutorial
On this page
Demo
Notebooks
Tensorflow:
Pytorch:
Edit this page
View source
Report an issue
Mask R-CNN Semantic Segmentation
The semantic segmentation approach described in this section is
Mask R-CNN
paper.
Mask R-CNN
is an extension of Faster R-CNN that adds a mask head to the detector. The mask head is a CNN that takes the feature map output by the RPN and the bounding box coordinates of the detected object and outputs a mask for each object. The mask is a binary image of the same size as the input image, where the pixels of the object are marked as 1 and the rest as 0.
In the object detection section we saw R-CNN that simply cropped proposals, generated externally to the detector, from the input image and classifies those proposals. Since the proposals were typically overlapping, CNN computations that extracted features per proposal were wasted and the detector was very slow. Fast R-CNN improved this by passing the whole input image once via a CNN feature extractor and used a feature map internally to this CNN to elect proposals, therefore avoiding the feature extraction per proposal. Faster R-CNN removed the external dependency on proposal generation and introduced a Region Proposal Network (RPN) internally to the detector. For the RPN to generate proposals, prior (or anchor) boxes were defined uniformly across the input image and the RPN was trained to predict the class of each anchor and by
how much the anchor needs to shift
to match the ground truth bounding box.
The code is this section together with the visualizations is useful to understand both Faster RCNN and the mask head extension that ‘colors’ the pixels of the detected objects.
Demo
Notebooks
Tensorflow:
The four notebooks in this section use MaskRCNN and are from Matterport’s original implementation - as such they will not work in TF2. For newer versions see
the TF Model Garden
or
the optimized for TPU repo
.
This notebook
demos MaskRCNN.
This notebook
visualizes the different pre-processing steps to prepare the training data.
This notebook
goes in depth into the steps performed to detect and segment objects. It provides visualizations of every step of the pipeline.
This notebook
inspects the weights of a trained model and looks for anomalies and odd patterns.
Pytorch:
There are two main implementations of MaskRCNN. The Detectron2 library, that is oriented towards research projects, offering more flexibility but a steeper learning curve and the model shipped as part of the torchvision library that is simpler to use at the expense of configurability.
Detectron
shows how an existing pretrained model can be used to do instance segmentation on new classes and how video can be processed via a relevant pipeline.
Torchvision
shows how an existing pretrained model can be used to do instance segmentation on new classes and how video can be processed via a relevant pipeline.
Mask R-CNN Demo
Edit this page
View source
Report an issue