Automated Reasoning – Engineering AI Agents
Engineering AI Agents
BOOK
Foundations
Training Deep Networks
Perception
Kinematics
State Estimation
Large Language Models
Multimodal Reasoning
Task Planning
Global Planning
Local Planning
Markov Decision Processes
Reinforcement Learning
VLA Agents
COURSES
Introduction to AI
AI for Robotics
Deep Learning for Computer Vision
DATA MINING - BEING PORTED
MEDIA
AI for Robotics
ABOUT ME
Logical Reasoning
Automated Reasoning
Introduction
Syllabus
Rules, rule the world
AI Agents
Foundations
Foundations
Deep Neural Networks
Training Deep Neural Networks
Perception
2D Perception
Recursive State Estimation
State Estimation
Large Language Models
Large Language Models
Logical Reasoning
Automated Reasoning
World Models
Logical Inference
Logical Agents
Planning
Task Planning
Acting - Markov Decision Processes
Markov Decision Processes
Acting - Reinforcement Learning
Reinforcement Learning
Math Background
Math for ML Textbook
Probability Basics
Linear Algebra for Machine Learning
Calculus
Resources
Submitting Your Assignment / Project
Your Programming Environment
Learn Python
Assignments
Assignment 1 (undergrad)
Assignment 1 (grad)
Assignment 2
Assignment 3
Assignment 4
Project
Introducing Erica - Your AI Tutor
On this page
Securing the cloud - automated reasoning
Edit this page
View source
Report an issue
Logical Reasoning
Automated Reasoning
Automated Reasoning
We have seen in an earlier chapter where we introduced a
dynamical system
governing the state evolution of the environment that a state is composed of variables and such
factored representations
are key in allowing
reasoning
at the
belief
space that are efficiently computed using recursive state estimators. We called this subsystem
probabilistic reasoning
subsystem and we positioned it immediately after the reflexive perception for a good reason. It is processing a very high ‘bandwidth’ state information that is noisy and needs to be filtered by - you guessed it - Bayesian filters to make it very useful for the subsequent upstream services of the AI system.
In this chapter we will see another powerful representation,
internal
to the agent, that can help agents to
reason
by expressing assertions about the world. These assertions are called
sentences
and are expressed in a
knowledge representation language
that is used to build a
Knowledge Base (KB)
- a concept central to AI. The KB starts with prior knowledge about the domain and problem at hand and incrementally is updated with the output of the probabilistic reasoning subsystem.
Lets see a concrete example as described in the figure below,
Imagine that the agent is a security robot at an airport and is moving around that environment. The problem it tries to solve is to identify an abandoned backpack / luggage.
Despite the simplicity of the problem statement this is a very challenging problem to solve. To begin with the robot must be creating static maps of the environment to be able to navigate it. Closer to the core task, we will need to preprogram the agent with all sorts of deep learning models to be able to even recognize backpacks or other luggage items via its perception system. The agent must be able to distinguish a situation where the backpack that was left behind by its carrier (a person) to a companion traveler (another person) to e.g. visit the restroom from the situation where the backpack was left behind maliciously. Unique object IDs must be assigned (symbolic segmentation) to persons and a very accurate scene graph must also be generated by its probabilistic reasoning system. It does not stop there as relational information must be generated to associate objects (e.g. carriers and pieces of luggage) and such information must be stored in the KB but perhaps more importantly the agent must be able to
reason
using the stored information in the KB.
Securing the cloud - automated reasoning
Logical reasoning is used not only for scene analytics. AWS was the first cloud provider to recognize its significance and the following video shows why and what they have developed in this space. To the best of our knowledge (minus military applications we don’t know) this is the largest deployment of logical reasoning technology to this day.
AWS re:Inforce 2019: The Evolution of Automated Reasoning Technology at AWS
Still to
learn
the value of logical reasoning you need to go to simpler domains / worlds than scene analytics and cloud networking - world models that are simple and instructive.
World Models
Edit this page
View source
Report an issue